





Jk,π̃ (xk ) = gk xk , µ̃k (xk ) + Jk+1,π̃ fk xk , µ̃k (xk )





≤ gk xk , µ̃k (xk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , µ̃k (xk ))

h

i

(2.28)

gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk )

= min uk ∈Uk (xk )





≤ gk xk , uk + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk )

= Hk (xk ),

where:

(a) The first equality is the DP equation for the rollout policy π̃.

(b) The first inequality holds by the induction hypothesis.

(c) The second equality holds by the definition of the rollout algorithm.

(d) The third equality is the DP equation for the policy that corresponds to the base heuristic (this is the step where we need sequential consistency).

This completes the induction proof of the cost improvement property (2.27).

Sequential Improvement

We will now show that the rollout policy has no worse performance than its base heuristic under a condition that is weaker than sequential consistency.

Let us recall that the rollout algorithm π̃ = {µ̃0 , . . . , µ̃N −1 } is defined by the minimization µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk )

where Q̃k (xk , uk ) is the approximate Q-factor defined by



Q̃k (xk , uk ) = gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk ) ,

[cf. Eqs. (2.25)], and Hk+1 (xk+1 ) denotes the cost of the base heuristic starting from state xk+1 .

We say that the base heuristic is sequentially improving, if for all xk and k, we have h

i

(2.29)

gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk ) ≤ Hk (xk ).

min uk ∈Uk (xk )

In words, the sequential improvement property (2.29) states that

Best heuristic Q-factor at xk ≤ Heuristic cost at xk .

(2.30)

To show that a sequentially improving heuristic yields policy improvement, simply note that from the calculation of Eq. (2.28), replacing the last two steps (that rely on sequential consistency) with Eq. (2.29), we have

Jk,π̃ (xk ) ≤ Hk (xk ),

for all xk and k.

Thus the rollout algorithm obtained with a sequentially improving base heuristic, will improve or at least will perform no worse than the base heuristic, from every starting state xk . Note that when the heuristic is sequentially consistent it is also sequentially improving, since in this case Eq.

(2.29) is satisfied with equality. This also follows from the interpretation

(2.30), since for a sequentially consistent heuristic, the heuristic cost is the

Q-factor of the heuristic at xk .

Empirically, it has been observed that the cost improvement obtained by rollout with a sequentially improving heuristic is typically considerable and often dramatic. Generally, however, it is hard to provide solid theoretical support for this observation. Several case studies support the consistently good performance of rollout (at least in the pure form described in this section); see the end of chapter references. The textbook [Ber17],

Section 6.4, provides some detailed worked-out examples. The price for the performance improvement is extra computation that is typically equal to the computation time of the base heuristic times a factor that is a low order polynomial of the problem size.

On the other hand the sequential improvement condition may not hold for a given base heuristic. It is thus important to know that any heuristic can be made to be sequentially improving with a simple modification, as we explain next.

The Fortified Rollout Algorithm

We will describe a variant of the rollout algorithm that implicitly uses a sequentially improving base heuristic, so that it has the sequential improvement property (2.29). This variant, called the fortified rollout algorithm, starts at x0 , and generates step-by-step a sequence of states

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

{x0 , x1 , . . . , xN } and corresponding sequence of controls. Upon reaching state xk it stores the trajectory

P k = {x0 , u0 , . . . , uk−1 , xk } that has been constructed up to stage k, called permanent trajectory, and it also stores a tentative trajectory

T k = {xk , uk , xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN −1 , xN } with corresponding cost

C(T k ) = gk (xk , uk )+gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 )+· · ·+gN −1 (xN −1 , uN −1 )+gN (xN ).

The tentative trajectory is such that P k ∪ T k is the best end-to-end trajectory computed up to stage k of the algorithm. Initially, T 0 is the trajectory generated by the base heuristic starting at the initial state x0 . The idea now is to deviate from the rollout algorithm at every state xk where the base heuristic produces a trajectory with larger cost than T k , and use T k instead.

In particular, upon reaching state xk , we run the rollout algorithm as earlier, i.e., for every uk ∈ Uk (xk ) and next state xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), we run the base heuristic from xk+1 , and find the control ũk that gives the best trajectory, denoted

T̃k = {xk , ũk , x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 , x̃N } with corresponding cost

C(T̃k ) = gk (xk , ũk )+gk+1 (x̃k+1 , ũk+1 )+· · ·+gN −1 (x̃N −1 , ũN −1 )+gN (x̃N ).

Whereas the ordinary rollout algorithm would choose control ũk and move to x̃k+1 , the fortified algorithm compares C(T k ) and C(T̃k ), and depending on which of the two is smaller, chooses uk or ũk and moves to xk+1 or to x̃k+1 , respectively. In particular, if C(T k ) ≤ C(T̃k ) the algorithm sets the next state and corresponding tentative trajectory to xk+1 = xk+1 ,

T k+1 = {xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN −1 , xN },

and if C(T k ) > C(T̃k ) it sets the next state and corresponding tentative trajectory to xk+1 = x̃k+1 ,

T k+1 = {x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 , x̃N }.

In other words the fortified rollout at xk follows the current tentative trajectory T k unless a lower cost trajectory T̃k is discovered by running the

Tentative trajectory T k

x0

xN

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right x′N

+1 xk+1 u

-Factors Current State kx k

Nearest uk x Neighbor Heuristic Movex to the Right

Current

) . . . State xk k N k xk+1

Permanent trajectory P k

k ũk

Nearest

Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right k x̃k+1 x̃N

Figure 2.4.4 Schematic illustration of fortified rollout. After k steps, we have constructed the permanent trajectory

P k = {x0 , u0 , . . . , uk−1 , xk }, and the tentative trajectory

T k = {xk , uk , xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN−1 , xN } such that P k ∪ T k is the best end-to-end trajectory computed so far. We now run the rollout algorithm at xk , i.e., we find the control ũk that minimizes over uk the sum of gk (xk , uk ) plus the heuristic cost from the state xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), and the corresponding trajectory

T̃k = {xk , ũk , x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN−1 , x̃N }.

If the cost of the end-to-end trajectory P k ∪T̃k is lower than the cost of P k ∪T k , we use we add (ũk , x̃k+1 ) to the permanent trajectory and set the tentative trajectory to

T k+1 = {x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN−1 , x̃N }.

Otherwise we add (uk , xk+1 ) to the permanent trajectory and set the tentative trajectory to

T k+1 = {xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN−1 , xN }.

Note that the fortified rollout will produce a different result than the ordinary rollout if the heuristic when started from xk+1 constructs a trajectory that is different than the tail portion of the tentative trajectory that starts at xk+1 .

base heuristic from all possible next states xk+1 . It follows that at every state the trajectory that consists of the union of the permanent and the tentative trajectories, has lower cost than the initial tentative trajectory, which is the one produced by the base heuristic starting from x0 . Moreover, it can be seen that if the base heuristic is sequentially improving, the rollout algorithm and its fortified version coincide. Experimental evidence suggests that it is important to use the fortified version if the base heuristic is not sequentially improving.

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Finally we note that the fortified rollout may be viewed as the ordinary rollout algorithm applied to a modified version of the original problem and modified base heuristic that has the sequential improvement property.

The corresponding construction is somewhat tedious and will not be given;

we refer to [BTW97] and [Ber17], Section 6.4.2.

Using Multiple Heuristics

In many problems, several promising heuristics may be available. It is then possible to use all of these heuristics in the rollout framework. The idea is to construct a superheuristic, which selects the best trajectory produced by all the base heuristic trajectories. The superheuristic can then be used as the base heuristic for a rollout algorithm.

In particular, let us assume that we have M base heuristics, and that the mth of these, given a state xk+1 , produces a trajectory m = {x m m m

T̃k+1 k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 , x̃N }, m ). The superheuristic then produces at x and corresponding cost C(T̃k+1 k+1 m for which C(T̃ m ) is minimum.

the trajectory T̃k+1 k+1

An interesting property, which can be readily verified by using the definitions, is that if all the base heuristics are sequentially improving, the same is true for the superheuristic. Moreover, there is a fortified version of the rollout algorithm, which has the property that it produces a trajectory with no worse cost than all the trajectories produced by the M base heuristics when started at the initial state x0 .

Rollout Algorithms with Multistep Lookahead

We may incorporate multistep lookahead into the deterministic rollout framework. To describe two-step lookahead in its most straightforward implementation, suppose that after k steps we have reached state xk . We then consider the set of all two-step-ahead states xk+2 we run the base heuristic starting from each of them, and compute the two-stage cost to get from xk to xk+2 , plus the cost of the base heuristic from xk+2 . We select the state, say x̃k+2 , that is associated with minimum cost, compute the controls ũk and ũk+1 that lead from xk to x̃k+2 , and choose ũk as the next rollout control and xk+1 = fk (xk , ũk ) as the next state; see Fig. 2.4.5.

The extension of the algorithm to lookahead of more than two steps is straightforward: instead of the two-step-ahead states xk+2 we run the base heuristic starting from all the possible ℓ-step ahead states xk+ℓ , etc.

For problems with a large number of stages, we can consider truncated rollout with terminal cost approximation. Here the rollout trajectories are obtained by running the base heuristic from the leaf nodes of the lookahead tree, and they are truncated after a given number of steps, while a terminal

Selective Depth Lookahead Tree

Truncated Rollout Terminal Cost Approximation

Truncated Rollout Terminal Cost Approximation J˜

Truncated Rollout Terminal Cost ApTruncated Rollout Terminal Cost Apxk

States xk+1 proximation

States xk+2

Figure 2.4.5 Illustration of truncated rollout with two-step lookahead and a

˜ The base heuristic is used for a limited terminal cost function approximation J.

number of steps and the terminal cost is added to compensate for the costs of the remaining steps.

cost approximation is added to the heuristic cost to compensate for the resulting error.

Among other variations of deterministic multistep rollout, let us mention a fortified version, which maintains a tentative trajectory, along the lines described earlier for the one-step lookahead case. In still another version of ℓ-step lookahead rollout, we may consider disregarding some of the states that are ℓ steps or less ahead, which are judged less promising according to some criterion (for example the costs of the base heuristic after a one-step lookahead); see Fig. 2.4.6. This may be viewed as selective depth lookahead , and aims to limit the number of times that the base heuristic is applied, which can become overwhelming as the length of lookahead is increased. We will encounter again the idea of selective depth lookahead in the context of stochastic rollout and Monte Carlo tree search (see the next section), where in addition to the length of lookahead, the accuracy of the simulation to evaluate the cost of the base heuristic is adapted to the results of earlier computations.

Finally, let us mention a variant of rollout that maintains multiple trajectories, extending from a given state xk to possibly multiple next states xk+1 . These states are the ones considered “most promising” based on the current results of the base heuristic (like being “ǫ-best”), but may be discarded later based on subsequent computations. Such extended forms

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

k

x1k+1 ,

+1

x2k+1

+1

x3k+1

+1

x4k+1

-Factors Current State x

. . .State xk x0 Current

Base Heuristic

Selective Depth Tree Projections of Leafs of the Tree

+1 States xN

Figure 2.4.6 Illustration of deterministic rollout with selective depth lookahead.

After k steps of the algorithm, we have a trajectory that starts at the initial state x0 and ends at state xk . We then generate the set of all possible next states

(states x1k+1 , x2k+1 , x3k+1 , x4k+1 in the figure). We “evaluate” these states using the base heuristic, and select some of them for “expansion,” i.e., we generate their next states xk+2 , evaluate them using the base heuristic, and continue. In the end we have a selective depth tree of next states, and the base heuristic costs from the leaves of the tree. The state xk+1 that corresponds to smallest overall cost is chosen by the selective depth lookahead rollout algorithm. For problems with a large number of stages, we can also truncate the rollout trajectories and add a terminal cost function approximation as compensation for the resulting error; cf.

Fig. 2.4.5.

of rollout are restricted to deterministic problems, and tend to be problemdependent. We will not consider them further in this book.

2.4.2

Stochastic Rollout and Monte Carlo Tree Search

We will now discuss the extension of the rollout algorithm to stochastic problems with a finite number of states. We will restrict ourselves to the case where the base heuristic is a policy π = {µ0 , . . . , µN −1 } (i.e., is sequentially consistent, in the context of deterministic problems). It is possible to consider more general rollout algorithms that involve base heuristics with

a sequential improvement property, but we will not pursue this idea, as it does not seem to have been applied so far in interesting stochastic contexts.

We first note that the cost improvement property that we showed for deterministic problems under the sequential consistency condition carries through for stochastic problems. In particular, let us denote by Jk,π (xk ) the cost corresponding to starting the base policy at state xk , and by Jk,π̃ (xk )

the cost corresponding to starting the rollout algorithm at state xk . We claim that

Jk,π̃ (xk ) ≤ Jk,π (xk ), for all xk and k.

We prove this inequality by induction similar to the deterministic case. Clearly it holds for k = N , since JN,π̃ = JN,π = gN . Assuming that it holds for index k + 1, we have for all xk ,

 n

o



Jk,π̃ (xk ) = E gk xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk + Jk+1,π̃ fk xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk n

o



≤ E gk xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk + Jk+1,π fk (xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk )

n

o

= min E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + Jk+1,π fk (xk , uk , wk )

uk ∈Uk (xk )

n

o



≤ E gk xk , µk (xk ), wk + Jk+1,π fk (xk , uk , wk )

= Jk,π (xk ),

where:

(a) The first equality is the DP equation for the rollout policy π̃.

(b) The first inequality holds by the induction hypothesis.

(c) The second equality holds by the definition of the rollout algorithm.

(d) The third equality is the DP equation for the policy π that corresponds to the base heuristic.

The induction proof of the cost improvement property (2.27) is thus complete.

Similar to deterministic problems, it has been observed empirically that for stochastic problems the rollout policy not only does not deteriorate the performance of the base policy, but also typically produces substantial cost improvement; see the case studies referenced at the end of the chapter.

Simulation-Based Implementation of the Rollout Algorithm

A conceptually straightforward way to compute the rollout control at a given state xk and time k is to consider each possible control uk ∈ Uk (xk )

and to generate a “large” number of simulated trajectories of the system starting from (xk , uk ). Thus a simulated trajectory has the form

 xi+1 = fi xi , µi (xi ), wi , i = k + 1, . . . , N − 1,

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

where {µk+1 , . . . , µN −1 } is the tail portion of the base policy, the first generated state is xk+1 = fk (xk , uk , wk ), and the disturbance sequences {wk , . . . , wN −1 } are independent random samples. The costs of the trajectories corresponding to a pair (xk , uk ) can be viewed as samples of the Q-factor n

o

Qk (xk , uk ) = E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + Jk+1,π̃ fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

where Jk+1,π̃ is the cost-to-go function of the base policy, i.e., Jk+1,π̃ (xk+1 )

is the cost of using the base policy starting from xk+1 . For problems with a large number of stages, it is also common to truncate the rollout trajectories and add a terminal cost function approximation as compensation for the resulting error.

By Monte Carlo averaging of the costs of the sample trajectories plus the terminal cost (if any), we obtain an approximation to the Q-factor

Qk (xk , uk ) for each control uk ∈ Uk (xk ), which we denote by Q̃k (xk , uk ).

We then compute the (approximate) rollout control µ̃k (xk ) with the minimization

(2.31)

µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg min Q̃k (xk , uk ).

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Example 2.4.2 (Backgammon)

The first impressive application of rollout was given for the ancient two-player game of backgammon, in the paper by Tesauro and Galperin [TeG96]; see

Fig. 2.4.7. They implemented a rollout algorithm, which attained a level of play that was better than all computer backgammon programs, and eventually better than the best humans. Tesauro had proposed earlier the use of one-step and two-step lookahead with lookahead cost function approximation provided by a neural network, resulting in a backgammon program called TDGammon [Tes89a], [Tes89b], [Tes92], [Tes94], [Tes95], [Tes02]. TD-Gammon was trained with the use of the TD(λ) algorithm that will be discussed in

Section 4.9, and was used as the base heuristic (for both players) to simulate game trajectories. The rollout algorithm also involved truncation of long game trajectories, using a terminal cost function approximation based on TD-Gammon. Game trajectories are of course random, since they involve the use of dice at each player’s turn. Thus the scores of many trajectories have to be generated and Monte Carlo averaged to assess the probability of a win from a given position.

An important issue to consider here is that backgammon is a two-player game and not an optimal control problem that involves a single decision maker. While there is a DP theory for sequential zero-sum games, this theory has not been covered in this book. Thus how are we to interpret rollout algorithms in the context of two-player games? The answer is to treat the two players unequally: one player uses the heuristic policy exclusively (TDGammon in the present example). The other player takes the role of the

Possible Moves

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Figure 2.4.7 Illustration of rollout for backgammon. At a given position and roll of the dice, the set of all possible moves is generated, and the outcome of the game for each move is evaluated by “rolling out” (simulating to the end) many games using a suboptimal/heuristic backgammon player (the TDGammon player was used for this purpose in [TeG96]), and by Monte-Carlo averaging the scores. The move that results in the best average score is selected for play.

optimizer, and tries to improve on the heuristic policy (TD-Gammon) by using rollout. Thus “policy improvement” in the context of the present example means that when playing against a TD-Gammon opponent, the rollout player achieves a better score on the average than if he/she were to play with the

TD-Gammon strategy. In particular, the theory does not guarantee that a rollout player that is trained using TD-Gammon for both players will do better than TD-Gammon would against a non-TD-Gammon opponent. This is a plausible hypothesis, albeit one that can only be tested empirically.

Most of the currently existing computer backgammon programs descend from TD-Gammon. Rollout-based backgammon programs are the most powerful in terms of performance, consistent with the principle that a rollout algorithm performs better than its base heuristic. However, they are too time-consuming for real-time play, because of the extensive on-line simulation requirement at each move (the situation in backgammon is exacerbated by its high branching factor, i.e., for a given position, the number of possible successor positions is quite large, as compared for example with chess). They have been used in a limited diagnostic way to assess the quality of neural networkbased programs (many articles and empirical works on computer backgammon are posted on-line; see e.g., http://www.bkgm.com/articles/page07.html).

Monte Carlo Tree Search

In the rollout implementation just described, we implicitly assumed that once we reach state xk , we generate the same large number of trajectories starting from each pair (xk , uk ), with uk ∈ U (xk ), to the end of the horizon.

The drawback of this is threefold:

(a) The trajectories may be too long because the horizon length N is large (or infinite, in an infinite horizon context).

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

(b) Some of the controls uk may be clearly inferior to others, and may not be worth as much sampling effort.

(c) Some of the controls uk that appear to be promising, may be worth exploring better through multistep lookahead.

This has motivated variants, generally referred to as Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS for short), which aim to trade off computational economy with a hopefully small risk of degradation in performance. Variants of this type involve, among others, early discarding of controls deemed to be inferior based on the results of preliminary calculations, and simulation that is limited in scope (either because of a reduced number of simulation samples, or because of a shortened horizon of simulation, or both).

In particular, a simple remedy for (a) above is to use rollout trajectories of reasonably limited length, with some terminal cost approximation at the end (in an extreme case, the rollout may be skipped altogether, i.e., rollout trajectories have zero length). The terminal cost function may be very simple (such as zero) or may be obtained through some auxiliary calculation. In fact the base policy used for rollout may be the one that provides the terminal cost function approximation, as noted for the rollout-based backgammon algorithm of Example 2.4.2.

A simple but less straightforward remedy for (b) is to use some heuristic or statistical test to discard some of the controls uk , as soon as this is suggested by the early results of simulation. Similarly, to implement (c)

one may use some heuristic to increase the length of lookahead selectively for some of the controls uk . This is similar to the selective depth lookahead procedure for deterministic rollout that we illustrated in Fig. 2.4.6.

The MCTS approach can be based on sophisticated procedures for implementing and combining the ideas just described. The implementation is often adapted to the problem at hand, but the general idea is to use the interim results of the computation and statistical tests to focus the simulation effort along the most promising directions. Thus to implement

MCTS one needs to maintain a lookahead tree, which is expanded as the relevant Q-factors are evaluated by simulation, and which balances the competing desires of exploitation and exploration (generate and evaluate controls that seem most promising in terms of performance versus assessing the potential of inadequately explored controls). Ideas that were developed in the context of multiarmed bandit problems have played an important role in the construction of this type of MCTS procedures (see the end-ofchapter references).

Example 2.4.3 (Statistical Tests for Adaptive Sampling with a One-Step Lookahead)

Let us consider a typical one-step lookahead selection strategy that is based on adaptive sampling. We are at a state xk and we try to find a control ũk

Q1,n + R1,n

-Factors Current

CurrentState

Statex xk

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Q2,n + R2,n

Q3,n + R3,n

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Sample Q-Factors Simulation

Figure 2.4.8 Illustration of one-step lookahead MCTS at a state xk . The

Q-factor sampled next corresponds to the control i with minimum sum of exploitation index (here taken to be the running average Qi,n ) and exploration index (Ri,n , possibly given by the UCB rule).

that minimizes an approximate Q-factor

n

Q̃k (xk , uk ) = E gk (xk , u, wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , u, wk )

o

over uk ∈ Uk (xk ), by averaging samples of Q̃k (xk , uk ). We assume that

Uk (xk ) contains m elements, which for simplicity are denoted 1, . . . , m. At the ℓth sampling period, knowing the outcomes of the preceding sampling periods, we select one of the m controls, say iℓ , and we draw a sample of

Q̃k (xk , iℓ ), whose value is denoted by Siℓ . Thus after the nth sampling period we have an estimate Qi,n of the Q-factor of each control i = 1, . . . , m that has been sampled at least once, given by

Pn δ(iℓ = i)Siℓ ℓ=1

Qi,n = P n ℓ=1

where

δ(iℓ = i) =

n

δ(iℓ = i)

if iℓ = i, if iℓ =

6 i.

Thus Qi,n is the empirical mean of the Q-factor of control i (total sample value divided by total number of samples), assuming that i has been sampled at least once.

After n samples have been collected, with each control sampled at least once, we may declare the control i that minimizes Qi,n as the “best” one, i.e., the one that truly minimizes the Q-factor Qk (xk , i). However, there is a positive probability that there is an error: the selected control may not minimize the true Q-factor. In adaptive sampling, roughly speaking, we want to design the sample selection strategy and the criterion to stop the sampling, in a way that keeps the probability of error small (by allocating some sampling effort to all controls), and the number of samples limited (by not wasting samples on controls i that appear inferior based on their empirical mean

Qi,n ).

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Intuitively, a good sampling policy will balance at time n the desires of exploitation and exploration (i.e., sample controls that seem most promising, in the sense that they have a small running average Qi,n , versus assessing the potential of inadequately explored controls, those i that have been sampled a small number of times). Thus it makes sense to sample next the control i that minimizes the sum

Ti,n + Ri,n of two indexes: an exploitation index Ti,n and an exploration index Ri,n .

Usually the exploitation index is chosen to be the empirical mean Qi,n . The exploration index is based an a confidence interval formula and depends on the sample count si =

n

X

δ(iℓ = i)

ℓ=1

of control i. A frequently suggested choice is the UCB rule (upper confidence bound), which sets

r

Ri,n = −c

log n

, si

where c is a positive constant that is selected empirically (some analysis sug√ gests values near c = 2, assuming that Qi,n is normalized to take values in the range [−1, 0]). The UCB rule, first proposed in the paper [ACF02], has been extensively discussed in the literature both for one-step and for multistep lookahead [where it is called UCT (UCB applied to trees; see [KoS16])]. Its justification is based on probabilistic analyses that relate to the multiarmed bandit problem, and is beyond our scope.

Sampling policies for MCTS with multistep lookahead are based on similar sampling ideas to the case of one-step lookahead. A simulated trajectory is run from a node i of the lookahead tree that minimizes the sum Ti,n + Ri,n of an exploitation index and an exploration index. There are many schemes of this type, but the details are beyond our scope (see the end-of-chapter references).

A major success has been the use of MCTS in two-player game contexts, such as the AlphaGo computer program (Silver et al. [SHM16]), which performs better than the best humans in the game of Go. This program integrates several of the techniques discussed in this chapter, and in

Chapters 3 and 4, including MCTS and rollout using a base policy that is trained off-line using a deep neural network. We will discuss neural network training techniques in Chapter 3. The AlphaZero program, which has performed spectacularly well against humans and other programs in the games of Go and chess (Silver et al. [SHS17]), bears some similarity with AlphaGo, and critically relies on MCTS, but does not use rollout.

Randomized Policy Improvement by MCTS

We have described rollout and MCTS as schemes for policy improvement:

start with a base policy, and compute an improved policy based on the results of one-step lookahead or multistep lookahead followed by simulation with the base policy. We have implicitly assumed that both the base policy and the rollout policy are deterministic in the sense that they map each state xk into a unique control µ̃k (xk ) [cf. Eq. (2.31)]. In some contexts, success has been achieved with randomized policies, which map a state xk to a probability distribution over the set of controls Uk (xk ), rather than mapping onto a single control. In particular, the AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs use MCTS to generate and use for training purposes randomized policies, which specify at each board position the probabilities with which the various moves are selected.

A randomized policy can be used as a base policy in exactly the same way as a deterministic policy: for a given state xk , we just generate sample trajectories and associated sample Q-factors, starting from each leaf-state of the lookahead tree that is rooted at xk . We then average the corresponding Q-factor samples. However, the rollout/improved policy, as we have described it, is a deterministic policy, i.e., it applies at xk the control µ̃k (xk ) that is “best” according to the results of the rollout [cf. Eq.

(2.31)]. Still, however, if we wish to generate an improved policy that is randomized, we can simply change the probabilities of different controls in the direction of the deterministic rollout policy. This can be done by increasing the probability of the “best” control µ̃k (xk ) from its base policy level, while decreasing the probabilities of the other controls.

The use of MCTS provides a related method to “improve” a randomized policy. In the process of adaptive simulation that is used in MCTS, we generate frequency counts of the different controls, i.e., the proportion of rollout trajectories associated each uk ∈ Uk (xk ). We can then obtain the rollout randomized policy by moving the probabilities of the base policy in the direction suggested by the frequency counts, i.e., increase the probability of high-count controls and reduce the probability of the others. This type of policy improvement is reminiscent of gradient-type methods, and has been successful in a number of applications; see Section 4.11 for further discussion, and the end-of-chapter references for such policy improvement implementations in AlphaGo, AlphaZero, and other application contexts.

Variance Reduction in Rollout - Comparing Advantages

When using simulation, sampling is often organized to effect variance reduction. By this we mean that for a given problem, the collection and use of samples is structured so that the variance of the simulation error is made smaller, with the same amount of simulation effort. There are several

Sec. 2.4
