i=1

for every k = 1, . . . , N − 1. This approximation can in turn be used to obtain a suboptimal one-step lookahead policy. Note that we may also try to optimize the approximation over λ, either by ad hoc experimentation or by a more systematic optimization method.† Another possibility is to use a more general Lagrangian term of the form

N−1

X k=0

λk

n

X i=1

ci uik

− Nb

!

,

in place of the term (2.17), where λ0 , . . . , λN−1 ≥ 0 are time-varying scalar multipliers.

2.3.2 Probabilistic Approximation - Certainty Equivalent

Control

We will now consider problem approximation based on modifying the underlying probabilistic structure. The most common example of this type is the certainty equivalent controller (CEC). It replaces the stochastic disturbances with deterministic variables that are fixed at some “typical” values.

Thus it acts as if a form of the certainty equivalence principle were holding, cf. the discussion of linear quadratic problems in Section 1.3.7.

The advantage of the CEC is that it involves a much less demanding computation than the stochastic DP algorithm: it requires the solution of a deterministic optimal control problem at each stage. This problem yields an optimal control sequence, the first component of which is used at the current stage, while the remaining components are discarded. Thus the

CEC is able to deal with stochastic and even partial information problems by using the more flexible and potent methodology of deterministic optimal control.

† Maximization of the lower bound approximation over λ is an interesting possibility. This is common in duality-based optimization. Generally the approach of this example falls within the framework of Lagrangian relaxation, a decomposition method that is based on the use of Lagrange multipliers and duality theory; see e.g., [BeT97], [Ber15a], [Ber16a].

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

We will describe the CEC for the stochastic DP problem of Section

1.2. Suppose that for every state-control pair (xk , uk ) we have selected a

“typical” value of the disturbance, which we denote by w̃k (xk , uk ). For example the expected values w̃k (xk , uk ) = E{wk | xk , uk }, can serve as typical values, if the disturbance spaces are convex subsets of

Euclidean spaces [so that they include w̃k (xk , uk )].

To implement the CEC at state xk and stage k we solve a deterministic optimal control problem obtained from the original problem by replacing all uncertain quantities by their typical values. In particular, we solve the problem

#

"

N

−1

X



(2.18)

gN (xN ) + gi xi , ui , w̃i (xi , ui ) .

min xi+1 =fi (xi ,ui ,w̃i (xi ,ui ))

ui ∈Ui (xi ), i=k,...,N−1

i=k

If {ũk , . . . , ũN −1 } is the optimal control sequence for this problem, we use the first control in this sequence and discard the remaining controls:

µ̃k (xk ) = ũk .

An alternative implementation of the CEC is to compute off-line an optimal policy

 d µ0 (x0 ), . . . , µdN −1 (xN −1 )

for the deterministic problem minimize gN (xN ) +

N

−1

X k=0

 gk xk , µk (xk ), w̃k (xk , uk )

 subject to xk+1 = fk xk , µk (xk ), w̃k (xk , uk ) ,

µk (xk ) ∈ Uk ,

k ≥ 0,

(2.19)

by using the DP algorithm. Then the control input µ̃k (Ik ) applied by the

CEC at time k is given by µ̃k (Ik ) = µdk (xk ).

The two variants of the CEC just given are equivalent in terms of performance. The main difference is that the first variant is well-suited for on-line replanning, while the second variant is more suitable for an off-line implementation.

Finally, let us note that the CEC can be extended to imperfect state observation problems, where the state xk is not known at time k, but instead an estimate of xk is available, which is based on measurements that have been obtained up to time xk . In this case, we find a suboptimal control similarly, as in Eqs. (2.18) and (2.19), but with xk replaced by the estimate, as if this estimate were exact.

Certainty Equivalent Control with Heuristics

Even though the CEC approach simplifies a great deal the computations, it still requires the optimal solution of a deterministic tail subproblem at each stage [cf. Eq. (2.18)]. This problem may still be difficult, and a more convenient approach may be to solve it suboptimally using a heuristic algorithm. In particular, given the state xk at time k, we may use some (easily implementable) heuristic to find a suboptimal control sequence

{ũk , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 } for the problem of Eq. (2.18), and then use ũk as the control for stage k.

An important enhancement of this idea is to use minimization over the first control uk and to use the heuristic only for the remaining stages k + 1, . . . , N − 1. To implement this variant of the CEC, we must apply at time k a control ũk that minimizes over uk ∈ Uk (xk ) the expression

 gk xk , uk , w̃k (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 (xk+1 ),

(2.20)

where

 xk+1 = fk xk , uk , w̃k (xk , uk ) ,

(2.21)

and Hk+1 is the cost-to-go function corresponding to the heuristic, i.e.,

Hk+1 (xk+1 ) is the cost incurred over the remaining stages k + 1, . . . , N − 1 starting from a state xk+1 , using the heuristic. This is a hybrid approach:

it resembles one-step lookahead with lookahead function Hk+1 , and it resembles certainty equivalence in that the uncertain quantities have been replaced by their typical values.

Note that for any next state xk+1 , it is not necessary to have a closedform expression for the heuristic cost-to-go Hk+1 (xk+1 ). Instead we can generate this cost by running the heuristic from xk+1 and computing the corresponding cost. Thus all the possible next states xk+1 must be computed for all possible values of the control uk , and then the heuristic must be run from each of these xk+1 to calculate Hk+1 (xk+1 ), which is needed in the minimization of the expression (2.20).

Example 2.3.4 (Parking with Probability Estimates)

Consider the one-directional parking problem of Example 1.3.3, where a driver is looking for a parking space along a line of N spaces, with a garage at the end of the line (position N ). The driver starts at space 0 and traverses the parking spaces sequentially, i.e., continues to subsequent spaces, up to a decision to park in space k at cost c(k), if space k is free, or upon reaching the garage where parking is mandatory at cost C. In Example 1.3.3, we assumed that space k is free with a given and fixed probability p(k), independently of whether other parking spaces are free or not.

Assume instead that p(k) is an estimate that is based on the driver’s observations of the status of preceding spaces. For example, this estimation process may involve exploiting probabilistic relations that may exist between

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

the parking statuses of different spaces. In particular, let us assume that the driver, upon arrival at space k, can estimate the belief state of the spaces that lie ahead, i.e., the vector of conditional probabilities p(k +1), . . . , p(N )

given the observations of the spaces 0, . . . , k.

The problem now becomes very hard to solve by exact DP, because the state space is infinite: at time k the state consists of the free/taken status of the current position k, plus the belief state of the spaces that lie ahead.

However, a simple suboptimal approach to the problem can be based on certainty equivalence: at time k, we fix the free/taken probabilities of the spaces that lie ahead to their current belief values, and act as if these values will not change in the future. Then upon reaching space k, the fast DP algorithm of Example 1.3.3 can be used to solve on-line the corresponding fixed probabilities problem, and to find the corresponding suboptimal decision.

As an illustration, let p(k) be estimated by using the ratio R(k) of the number of free spaces encountered up to reaching space k divided by the total number k + 1. Knowing R(k), the driver adjusts the probabilities p(m) for m > k to the level



p̂ m, R(k) = γp(m) + (1 − γ)R(k), where γ is a known constant between 0 and 1. The problem can then be solved by exact DP, by using as state at time k the free/taken status of space k together with the ratio R(k) [in the terminology of Section 1.3, R(k) is a sufficient statistic, which contains all the relevant information for the purposes of control]. The number of possible values of R(k) grows exponentially with k, so the solution by exact DP may become intractable for large N . However, by applying the probabilistic approximation approach of this example, the corresponding suboptimal policy may be easily obtained and implemented on-line.

Partial Certainty Equivalent Control

In the preceding descriptions of the CEC all future and present uncertain quantities are fixed at their typical values. A useful variation is to fix at typical values only some of these quantities. For example, a partial state information problem may be treated as one of perfect state information, using an estimate x̃k of xk as if it were exact, while fully

 taking into account the stochastic nature of the disturbances. Thus, if µp0 (x0 ), . . . , µpN −1 (xN −1 )

is an optimal policy obtained from the DP algorithm for the stochastic perfect state information problem

)

(

N

−1

X

 minimize E gN (xN ) + gk xk , µk (xk ), wk k=0

 subject to xk+1 = fk xk , µk (xk ), wk , µk (xk ) ∈ Uk , k = 0, . . . , N − 1,

then the control input applied by this variant of CEC at time k is µpk (x̃k ), where x̃k is the estimate of xk given the information available up to time k. Let us provide an example.

Example 2.3.5 (The Unscrupulous Innkeeper)

Consider an innkeeper who charges one of m different rates r1 , . . . , rm for a room as the day progresses, depending on whether he has many or few vacancies, so as to maximize his expected total income during the day. A quote of a rate ri is accepted with probability pi and is rejected with probability

1 − pi , in which case the customer departs, never to return during that day.

When the number y of customers that will ask for a room during the rest of the day (including the customer currently asking for a room) is known and the number of vacancies is x, the optimal expected income J˜(x, y) of the innkeeper is given by the DP algorithm

˜ y) = max

J(x,

i=1,...,m

˜ − 1, y − 1) + (1 − pi )J(x,

˜ y − 1) , pi ri + J(x







(2.22)

for all x ≥ 1 and y ≥ 1, with initial conditions

˜ 0) = J˜(0, y) = 0,

J(x,

for all x and y.

˜ y) for all pairs (x, y).

This algorithm can be used to obtain the values of J(x,

Consider now the case where the innkeeper does not know y at the times of decision, but instead only maintains a probability distribution for y. Then, it can be seen that the problem becomes a difficult partial state information problem. The exact DP algorithm should then be executed over the set of the pairs of x and the belief state of y. Yet a reasonable partially stochastic

CEC is based on approximating the optimal cost-to-go of subsequent decisions with J˜(x − 1, ỹ − 1) or J˜(x, ỹ − 1), where the function J˜ is calculated by the preceding recursion (2.22) and ỹ is an estimate of y, such as the closest integer to the expected value of y. In particular, according to this one-step lookahead policy, when the innkeeper has a number of vacancies x ≥ 1, he quotes to the current customer the rate that maximizes

˜ − 1, ỹ − 1) − J˜(x, ỹ − 1) .

pi ri + J(x



Thus in this suboptimal scheme, the innkeeper acts as if the estimate ỹ were exact.

Other Variations of Certainty Equivalent Control

It is also possible to use more general approaches to implement one-step lookahead control based on simplification of the probabilistic structure of the problem. The possibilities are highly problem-dependent by nature, but we may distinguish a few general techniques, which we illustrate through examples.

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

Example 2.3.6 (Decoupling Disturbance Distributions)

Let us consider a CEC approach in the context of enforced decomposition (cf.

Section 2.3.1) when the subsystems are coupled only through the disturbance.

In particular, consider n subsystems of the form xik+1 = f i (xik , uik , wki ),

i = 1, . . . , n.

Here the ith subsystem has its own state xik , control uik , and cost per stage g i (xik , uik , wki ), but the probability distribution of wki depends on the full state xk = (x1k , . . . , xn k ).

A natural form of suboptimal control is to solve at each stage k and for each i, the ith subsystem optimization problem where the probability distrii i bution of the future disturbances wk+1

, . . . , wN−1 is “decoupled,” in the sense that it depends only on the corresponding “local” states xik+1 , . . . , xiN−1 . This distribution may be derived by using some nominal values x̃jk+1 , . . . , x̃jN−1 , j 6= i, of the future states of the other subsystems, and these nominal values may in turn depend on the full current state xk . The first control uik in the optimal policy thus obtained is applied at the ith subsystem in stage k, and the remaining portion of this policy is discarded.

Example 2.3.7 (Approximation Using Scenarios)

We noted earlier the possibility to approximate the optimal cost-to-go with a CEC approach, whereby for a given state xk+1 at time k + 1, we fix the remaining disturbances at some nominal values w̃k+1 , . . . , w̃N−1 , and we compute an optimal control or heuristic-based trajectory starting from xk+1 at time k + 1.

This CEC approximation involves a single nominal trajectory of the remaining uncertainty. To strengthen this approach, it is natural to consider multiple trajectories of the uncertainty, called scenarios, and to construct an approximation to the optimal cost-to-go that involves, for every one of the scenarios, the cost of either an optimal or a heuristic policy.

Mathematically, we assume that we have a method, which at a given state xk+1 , generates q uncertainty sequences s s ws (xk+1 ) = (wk+1

, . . . , wN−1

),

s = 1, . . . , q.

∗

These are the scenarios considered at state xk+1 . The optimal cost Jk+1

(xk+1 )

is then approximated by

J˜k+1 (xk+1 , r) =

q

X

rs Cs (xk+1 ),

(2.23)

s=1

where r = (r1 , . . . , rq ) is a probability distribution, i.e., a vector of nonnegative parameters that add to 1, and Cs (xk+1 ) is the cost corresponding to an occurrence of the scenario ws (xk+1 ), when starting from state xk+1 and using either an optimal or a given heuristic policy.

At State xk

DP minimization

Heuristic Cost“Future”

First ℓ Steps “Future”

min

uk ,µk+1 ,...,µk+ℓ−1

E

!

gk (xk , uk , wk ) +

k+ℓ−1

"

m=k+1

%

#

$ gk xm , µm (xm ), wm + J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ )

Heuristic

Cost

... MCTS Lookahead Minimization Cost-to-go

Approximation

Obtained with by running the Run the Base Policy

2 1 10 2-step lookahead 3-step lookahead 2 Stages 3 Stages

Figure 2.4.1 Schematic illustration of rollout with ℓ-step lookahead. The approximate cost J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) is obtained by running a heuristic algorithm/base policy from state xk+ℓ .

There may be several problem-dependent ways to generate the scenarios, possibly including randomization and/or simulation. The parameters r1 , . . . , rq may depend on the time index, and may be interpreted as “aggregate probabilities” that encode the aggregate effect on the cost-to-go function of uncertainty sequences that are similar to the scenario ws (xk+1 ). They may be computed using some ad hoc scheme, or some more systematic approach.

The idea of simplifying the probabilistic model of the system, possibly using a model-free Monte-Carlo type of process, is also related to the rollout approach that is the subject of the next section.

2.4 ROLLOUT

The principal aim of rollout is policy improvement , i.e., start with a suboptimal/heuristic policy, called the base policy (or sometimes, the default policy), and produce an improved policy by limited lookahead minimization with use of the heuristic at the end. This policy is called the rollout policy, and the fact that it is indeed “improved” will be established, under various conditions, in what follows in this section and also in Chapter 4.

In its purest one-step lookahead form, rollout can be defined very simply: it is approximation in value space with the approximate cost-to-go values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) calculated by running the base policy, starting from each possible next state xk+1 . There is also an ℓ-step lookahead generalization, where the heuristic is used to obtain the approximate cost-to-go values

J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) from each possible next state xk+ℓ (see Fig. 2.4.1). In a variant for problems involving a long horizon, the run of the base policy may be

“truncated,” i.e., it may be used for a limited number of steps, with some cost function approximation at the end to take into account the cost of the remaining steps.

The choice of base policy is of course important for the performance of the rollout approach. However, experimental evidence has shown that the choice of base policy may not be crucial for many contexts, and in

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

fact surprisingly good rollout performance may be attained even with a relatively poor base heuristic, particularly with a long lookahead.

Note also here a connection and overlap between the rollout and problem approximation approaches. Suppose that we use as base heuristic an optimal policy for the approximating problem. Then the one-step (or multistep) rollout policy is the same as the one obtained by one-step (or multistep, respectively) lookahead with terminal cost function approximation equal to the optimal cost of the approximating problem.

In Chapter 4 within the context of infinite horizon problems, we will view there the method of policy iteration as a perpetual rollout algorithm, whereby a sequence of suboptimal policies is generated, each one being a rollout policy obtained by using the preceding one as a base policy. In this chapter, however, we focus on a one-time policy improvement starting from a given base policy.

We will describe rollout first for finite-state deterministic problems and one-step lookahead, and then for stochastic problems, in Sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2, respectively. We will discuss rollout for infinite-spaces problems, including model predictive control in Section 2.5. We will also discuss the use of rollout in combination with some other approximation scheme. This is to use one-step or multistep lookahead with the cost function approximation consisting of two parts:

(a) Rollout with the given base policy over a limited horizon.

(b) A terminal cost function approximation at the end of the rollout horizon, such as an estimate of the true cost function of the policy.

We will reconsider schemes of this type in Chapter 4, Section 4.5.3, in the context of infinite horizon problems.

2.4.1 On-Line Rollout for Deterministic Finite-State Problems

Let us consider a deterministic DP problem with a finite number of controls and a given initial state (so the number of states is also finite). Given a state xk at time k, rollout considers all the tail subproblems that start at every possible next state xk+1 , and solves them suboptimally by using some algorithm, referred to as base heuristic.† Thus when at xk , rollout generates on-line the next states xk+1 that correspond to all uk ∈ Uk (xk ), and uses the base heuristic to compute the sequence of states {xk+1 , . . . , xN } and controls {uk+1 , . . . , uN −1 } such that xi+1 = fi (xi , ui ),

i = k, . . . , N − 1.

† For deterministic problems we prefer to use the term “base heuristic” rather than “base policy” for reasons to be explained later in this section, in the context of the notion of sequential consistency.

Next Cities Next States

x0

k xk+1

Nearest

Neighbor Heuristic u x k

-Factors Current State x u′

′

Current

) . . . State xk k k xk+1 x1

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

′ u′′ x k k

′′

+1 xk+1

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

k

xN

x′N x′′N

. . . Q-Factors

Figure 2.4.2 Schematic illustration of rollout with one-step lookahead for a deterministic problem. At state xk , for every pair (xk , uk ), uk ∈ Uk (xk ), the base heuristic generates a Q-factor Q̃k (xk , uk ) [cf. Eq. (2.25)], and selects the control µ̃k (xk ) with minimal Q-factor.

The rollout algorithm then applies the control that minimizes over uk ∈

Uk (xk ) the tail cost expression for stages k to N :

gk (xk , uk ) + gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 ) + · · · + gN −1 (xN −1 , uN −1 ) + gN (xN ). (2.24)

Equivalently, and more succinctly, the rollout algorithm applies at state xk the control µ̃k (xk ) given by the minimization µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk ),

where Q̃k (xk , uk ) is the approximate Q-factor defined by



Q̃k (xk , uk ) = gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk ) ,

(2.25)

with Hk+1 (xk+1 ) denoting the cost of the base heuristic starting from state xk+1 [i.e., Hk+1 (xk+1 ) is the sum of all the terms in Eq. (2.24), except the first]; see Fig. 2.4.2. The rollout process defines a suboptimal policy π̃ = {µ̃0 , . . . , µ̃N −1 }, referred to as the rollout policy.

Example 2.4.1 (Traveling Salesman Problem)

Let us consider the traveling salesman problem, whereby a salesman wants to find a minimum mileage/cost tour that visits each of N given cities c =

0, . . . , N − 1 exactly once and returns to the city he started from (cf. Example

1.3.1). With each pair of distinct cities c, c′ , we associate a traversal cost g(c, c′ ). Note that we assume that we can go directly from every city to every other city. There is no loss of generality in doing so because we can assign a very high cost g(c, c′ ) to any pair of cities (c, c′ ) that is precluded from participation in the solution. The problem is to find a visit order that goes through each city exactly once and whose sum of costs is minimum.

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Current Partial Tour Next Cities Nearest

NeighborTours

Complete

k xN k xk+1

Initial City Current Partial

Neighbor Heuristic uk Nearest xTour Nearest

Initial City Current Current

Partial Tour

Next

Cities

Neighbor

Partial Tour

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

′ k uk x′k+1 x′N

Current

State x x0

) ...

k

0 x1

′ u′′ x

Nearest

Neighbor

Heuristic k k

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

′′ x′′N

+1 xk+1

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

Figure 2.4.3 Schematic illustration of rollout with the nearest neighbor heuristic for the traveling salesman problem. The initial state x0 consists of a single city. The final state xN is a complete tour of N cities, containing each city exactly once.

There are many heuristic approaches for solving the traveling salesman problem. For illustration purposes, let us focus on the simple nearest neighbor heuristic, which constructs a sequence of partial tours, i.e., sequences of ordered collections of distinct cities. Here, we select a single city c0 and at each iteration, we add to the current partial tour a city that does not close a cycle and minimizes the cost of the enlargement. In particular, after k iterations, we have a sequence {c0 , . . . , ck } consisting of distinct cities, and at the next iteration, we add a new city ck+1 that minimizes g(ck , ck+1 ) over all cities ck+1 6= c0 , . . . , ck . After the nearest neighbor heuristic selects city cN−1 , a complete tour is formed with total cost g(c0 , c1 ) + · · · + g(cN−2 , cN−1 ) + g(cN−1 , c0 ).

(2.26)

We can formulate the traveling salesman problem as a DP problem as we discussed in Example 1.3.1. We choose a starting city, say c0 , as the initial state x0 . Each state xk corresponds to a partial tour (c0 , c1 , . . . , ck )

consisting of distinct cities. The states xk+1 , next to xk , are sequences of the form (c0 , c1 , . . . , ck , ck+1 ) which correspond to adding one more unvisited city ck+1 6= c0 , c1 , . . . , ck . The terminal states xN are the complete tours of the form (c0 , c1 , . . . , cN−1 , c0 ), and the cost of the corresponding sequence of city choices is the cost of the corresponding complete tour. Thus a state trajectory yields a complete tour with total cost given by Eq. (2.26).

Let us now use as a base heuristic the nearest neighbor method. The corresponding rollout algorithm operates as follows: After k < N − 1 iterations, we have a state xk , i.e., sequence {c0 , . . . , ck } consisting of distinct cities. At the next iteration, we add one more city as follows: We run the nearest neighbor heuristic starting from each of the sequences of the form

{c0 , . . . , ck , c} where c 6= c1 , . . . , ck . We then select as next city ck+1 the city c that yielded the minimum cost tour under the nearest neighbor heuristic;

see Fig. 2.4.3.

Cost Improvement with a Rollout Algorithm - Sequential

Consistency

The definition of the rollout algorithm leaves open the choice of the base heuristic. There are several types of suboptimal solution methods that can be used as base heuristics, such as greedy algorithms, local search, genetic algorithms, tabu search, and others. Clearly we want to choose a base heuristic that strikes a good balance between quality of solutions produced and computational tractability.

Intuitively, we expect that the rollout policy’s performance is no worse than the one of the base heuristic. Since rollout optimizes over the first control before applying the heuristic, it makes sense to conjecture that it performs better than applying the heuristic without the first control optimization. However, some special conditions must hold in order to guarantee this cost improvement property. We provide two such conditions, sequential consistency and sequential improvement , and then show how to modify the algorithm to deal with the case where these conditions are not satisfied.

We say that the base heuristic is sequentially consistent if it has the property that when it generates the sequence

{xk , xk+1 , . . . , xN } starting from state xk , it also generates the sequence

{xk+1 , . . . , xN } starting from state xk+1 . In other words, the base heuristic is sequentially consistent if it “stays the course”: when the starting state xk is moved forward to the next state xk+1 of its state trajectory, the heuristic will not deviate from the remainder of the trajectory.

As an example, the reader may verify that the nearest neighbor heuristic described in the traveling salesman Example 2.4.1 is sequentially consistent. Similar examples include the use of many types of greedy heuristics (see [Ber17], Section 6.4). Generally most heuristics used in practice satisfy the sequential consistency condition at “most” states xk . However, some heuristics of interest may violate this condition at some states.

Conceptually, it is important to note that sequential consistency is equivalent to the heuristic being a legitimate DP policy. By this we mean that there exists a policy {µ0 , . . . , µN −1 } such that the sequence generated by the base heuristic starting from any state xk is the same as the one generated by {µ0 , . . . , µN −1 } starting from the same state xk . To see this, note that a policy clearly has the sequential consistency property, and conversely, a sequentially consistent base heuristic defines a policy: the one that moves from xk to the state xk+1 that lies on the path {xk , xk+1 , . . . , xN } generated by the base heuristic.

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Based on this fact, we can show that the rollout algorithm obtained with a sequentially consistent base heuristic yields an improved cost over the base heuristic. In particular, let us consider the rollout policy π̃ =

{µ̃0 , . . . , µ̃N −1 }, and let Jk,π̃ (xk ) denote the cost obtained with π̃ starting from xk . We claim that

Jk,π̃ (xk ) ≤ Jˆk (xk ),

for all xk and k,

(2.27)

where Jˆk (xk ) denotes the cost of the base heuristic starting from xk .

We prove this inequality by induction. Clearly it holds for k = N , since JN,π̃ = HN = gN . Assume that it holds for index k + 1. For any state xk , let uk be the control applied by the base heuristic at xk . Then we have
