Sec. 2.0

approximated by a function J˜k+ℓ . For example, in two-step lookahead the function J˜k+1 is given by n

J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) = min

E gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 )

uk+1 ∈Uk+1 (xk+1 )

o

+ J˜k+2 fk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 ) ,

* .

where J˜k+2 is some approximation of the optimal cost-to-go function Jk+2

Actually, as the preceding two-step lookahead case illustrates, one may view ℓ-step lookahead as the special case of one-step lookahead where the lookahead function is the optimal cost function of an (ℓ − 1)-stage DP problem with a terminal cost at the end of the ℓ−1 stages, which is equal to

J˜k+ℓ . However, it is often important to discuss ℓ-step lookahead separately, in order to address special implementation issues that do not arise in the context of one-step lookahead.

In our initial discussion of approximation in value space of Section 2.1, we will focus on one-step lookahead. There are straightforward extensions of the main ideas to the multistep context, which we will discuss in Section

2.2.

Approximation in Policy Space

The major alternative to approximation in value space is approximation in policy space, whereby we select the policy by using optimization over a suitably restricted class of policies, usually a parametric family of some form.

An important advantage of this approach is that the computation of controls during on-line operation of the system is often much easier compared with the minimization (2.1). However, this advantage can also be gained by combining approximation in value space with policy approximation in a two-stage scheme:

(a) Obtain the approximately optimal cost-to-go functions J˜k , thereby defining a corresponding suboptimal policy µ̃k , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, via the one-step lookahead minimization (2.1).

(b) Approximate µ̃k , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, using a training set consisting of a large number q of sample pairs xsk , usk , s = 1, . . . , q, where usk = µ̃k (xsk ). For example, introduce a parametric family of policies µk (xk , rk ), k = 0, . . . , N − 1, of some form, where rk is a parameter, such as a family represented by a neural net, and then estimate the parameters rk using some form of regression, e.g., rk ∈ arg min r

q

X

usk − µk (xsk , r)

.

s=1

In this chapter we discuss primarily approximation in value space, although some of the ideas are also relevant to approximation in policy space.

We focus on finite horizon problems, postponing the discussion of infinite horizon problems for Chapter 4 and later. However, the finite horizon ideas are relevant to the infinite horizon setting, and many of the methods of the present chapter and Chapter 3 also apply with small modifications to infinite horizon problems.

Model-Based Versus Model-Free Implementation

An important attribute of the solution process is whether an analytical model or Monte Carlo simulation is used to compute expected values such as those arising in one-step and multistep lookahead expressions. We distinguish between two cases:

(a) In the model-based case, we assume that the conditional probability distribution of wk , given (xk , uk ), is available in essentially closed form. By this we mean that the value of pk (wk | xk , uk ) is available for any triplet (xk , uk , wk ). Moreover, the functions gk and fk are also available. In a model-based solution process, expected values, such as the one in the lookahead expression of Eq. (2.1), are obtained with algebraic calculations as opposed to Monte Carlo simulation.

(b) In the model-free case, the calculation of the expected value in the expression of Eq. (2.1), and other related expressions, is done with

Monte Carlo simulation. There may be two reasons for this.

(1) A mathematical model of the probabilities pk (wk | xk , uk ) is not available, but instead there is a computer program/simulator that for any given state xk and control uk , simulates sample probabilistic transitions to a successor state xk+1 , and generates the corresponding transition costs. In this case the expected value can be computed approximately by Monte Carlo simulation.†

(2) The probabilities pk (wk | xk , uk ) are available for any triplet

(xk , uk , wk ), but for reasons of computational efficiency we prefer to compute the expected value in the expression (2.1) by using sampling and Monte Carlo simulation. Thus the expected value is computed as in the case where there is no mathematical model, but instead there is a computer simulator.‡

† The term Monte Carlo simulation mostly refers to the use of a software simulator. However, a hardware or a combined hardware/software simulator may also be used in some practical situations to generate samples that are used for Monte Carlo averaging.

‡ The idea of using Monte Carlo simulation to compute complicated integrals or even sums of many numbers is used widely in various types of numerical computations. It encompasses efficient Monte Carlo techniques known as Monte Carlo

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

Approximate Min Approximate

Parametric approximation Neural nets Discretization

Steps “Future” First Step Steps “Future”

!

"

min E gk (xk , uk , wk )+J˜k+1 (xk+1 )

uk

{·} Approximate Cost-to-Go J˜k+1

Approximate

Min choices

Approximate

E{·} approximation Problem approximation

Simple

Parametric

Model Predictive Control

Certainty equivalence Monte CarloRollout, tree search choices Tree

Parametric

Aggregation Adaptive simulationSimple

Monte-Carlo

Search approximation Problem approximation

Parametric approximation Neural nets

Certainty equivalence Monte Carlo tree search

Aggregation

Figure 2.1.1 Schematic illustration of various options for approximation in value space with one-step lookahead. The lookahead function values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) ap∗ proximate the optimal cost-to-go values Jk+1

(xk+1 ), and can be computed by a variety of methods. There may be additional approximations in the minimization over uk and in the computation of the expected value over wk ; see Section 2.1.1.

In summary, the use of sampling and Monte Carlo simulation is the defining attribute for a method to be model-based or model-free in the terminology of this book . In particular, a model-free method is one that can be applied both when there is a mathematical model and when there is not. This view of a model-free approach aims to avoid ambiguities in cases where a model is available, but a model-free method is used anyway for reasons of convenience or computational efficiency.

Note that for deterministic problems there is no expected value to compute, so these problems typically come under the model-based category, even if values of the functions gk and fk become available through complicated computer calculations. Still however, Monte Carlo simulation may enter the solution process of a deterministic problem for a variety of reasons. For example the games of chess and Go are perfectly deterministic, but the AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs (Silver et al. [SHM16], [SHS17])

use randomized policies and rely heavily on Monte Carlo tree search techniques, which will be discussed later in Section 2.4. The same is true for some policy gradient methods, which will be discussed in Chapter 4.

2.1 GENERAL ISSUES OF APPROXIMATION IN VALUE SPACE

There are two major issues in a value space approximation scheme, and each of the two can be considered separately from the other:

(1) Obtaining J˜k , i.e., the method to compute the lookahead functions

J˜k that are involved in the lookahead minimization (2.1). There are integration and importance sampling; see textbooks such as [Liu01], [AsG10],

[RoC10] for detailed developments.

quite a few approaches here (see Fig. 2.1.1). Several of them are discussed in this chapter, and more will be discussed in subsequent chapters.

(2) Control selection, i.e., the method to perform the minimization (2.1)

and implement the suboptimal policy µ̃k . Again there are several exact and approximate methods for control selection, some of which will be discussed in this chapter (see Fig. 2.1.1).

In this section we will provide a high level discussion of these issues.

2.1.1 Methods for Computing Approximations in Value Space

Regarding the computation of J˜k , we will consider four types of methods:

(a) Problem approximation (Section 2.3): Here the functions J˜k in Eq.

(2.1) are obtained as the optimal or nearly optimal cost functions of a simplified optimization problem, which is more convenient for computation. Simplifications may include, exploiting decomposable structure, ignoring various types of uncertainties, and reducing the size of the state space. The latter form of simplification is known as aggregation, and is discussed separately in Chapter 5.

(b) On-line approximate optimization (Section 2.4): These methods often involve the use of a suboptimal policy or heuristic, which is applied on-line when needed to approximate the true optimal cost-to-go values. The suboptimal policy may be obtained by any other method, e.g., problem approximation. Rollout algorithms and model predictive control are prime examples of these methods.

(c) Parametric cost approximation (Chapter 3): Here the functions J˜k in Eq. (2.1) are obtained from a given parametric class of functions

J˜k (xk , rk ), where rk is a parameter vector, selected by a suitable algorithm. The parametric class is typically obtained by using prominent characteristics of xk called features, which can be obtained either through insight into the problem at hand, or by using training data and some form of neural network.

(d) Aggregation (Chapter 5): This is a special but rather sophisticated form of problem approximation. A simple example is to select a set of representative states for each stage, restrict the DP algorithm to these states only, and approximate the costs-to-go of other states by interpolation between the optimal costs-to-go of the representative states. In another example of aggregation, the state space is divided into subsets, and each subset is viewed as a state of an “aggregate DP problem.” The functions J˜k are then derived from the optimal cost functions of the aggregate problem. The state space partition can be arbitrary, but is often determined by using features (states with “similar” features are grouped together). Moreover, aggregation can be

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

combined in complementary fashion with the methods (a)-(c) above, and can use as a starting point an approximate cost-to-go function produced by any one of these methods; e.g., apply a parametric approximation method and enhance the resulting cost function through local corrections obtained by aggregation.

Additional variations of the above methods are obtained when used in combination with approximate minimization over uk in Eq. (2.1), and also when the expected value over wk is computed approximately via a certainty equivalence approximation (cf. Section 2.3.2) or adaptive simulation and

Monte Carlo tree search (Sections 2.1.2 and 2.4.2).

2.1.2

Off-Line and On-Line Methods

In approximation in value space an important consideration is whether the cost-to-go functions J˜k+1 and the suboptimal control functions µ̃k , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, of Eq. (2.1) are computed off-line (i.e., before the control process begins, and for all xk and k), or on-line (i.e., after the control process begins, when needed, and for just the states xk to be encountered).

Usually, for challenging problems, the controls µ̃k (xk ) are computed on-line, since their storage may be difficult for a large state space. However, the on-line or off-line computation of J˜k+1 is an important design choice.

We thus distinguish between:

(i) Off-line methods, where the entire function J˜k+1 in Eq. (2.1) is computed for every k, before the control process begins. The values

J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) are either stored in memory or can be obtained with a simple and fast computation, as needed in order to compute controls by one-step lookahead. The advantage of this is that most of the computation is done off-line, before the first control is applied at time

0. Once the control process starts, no extra computation is needed to obtain J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) for implementing the corresponding suboptimal policy.

(ii) On-line methods, where most of the computation is performed just after the current state xk becomes known, the values J˜k (xk+1 ) are computed only at the relevant next states xk+1 , and are used to compute the control to be applied via Eq. (2.1). These methods require the computation of a control only for the N states actually encountered in the control process. In contrast with the off-line approximation methods, these methods are well-suited for on-line replanning, whereby the problem data may change over time.

Examples of typically off-line schemes are neural network and other parametric approximations, as well as aggregation. Examples of typically online schemes are rollout and model predictive control. Schemes based on problem approximation may be either on-line or off-line depending on other

problem-related factors. Of course there are also problem-dependent hybrid methods, where significant computation is done off-line to expedite the on-line computation of needed values of J˜k+1 .

2.1.3 Model-Based Simplification of the Lookahead Minimization

We will now consider ways to facilitate the calculation of the suboptimal control µ̃k (xk ) at state xk via the minimization of the one-step lookahead expression n

o

(2.2)

E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

once the cost-to-go approximating functions J˜k+1 have been selected. In this section, we will assume that we have a mathematical model, i.e., that the functions gk and fk are available in essentially closed form, and that the conditional probability distribution of wk , given (xk , uk ), is also available.

In particular, Monte Carlo simulation is not used to compute the expected value in Eq. (2.2). We will address the model-free case in the next section.

Important issues here are the computation of the expected value (if the problem is stochastic) and the minimization over uk ∈ Uk (xk ) in Eq.

(2.2). Both of these operations may involve substantial work, which is of particular concern when the minimization is to be performed on-line.

One possibility to eliminate the expected value from the expression

(2.2) is (assumed) certainty equivalence. Here we choose a typical value w̃k of wk , and use the control µ̃k (xk ) that solves the deterministic problem h

i

(2.3)

gk (xk , uk , w̃k ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , w̃k ) .

min uk ∈Uk (xk )

The approach of turning a stochastic problem into a deterministic one by replacing uncertain quantities with single typical values highlights the possibility that J˜k may itself be obtained by using deterministic methods.

We will discuss this approach and its variations in greater detail later in this chapter (see Section 2.3).

Let us now consider the issue of algorithmic minimization over Uk (xk )

in Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3). If Uk (xk ) is a finite set, the minimization can be done by brute force, through exhaustive computation and comparison of the relevant cost expressions. This of course can be very time consuming, particularly for multistep lookahead, but parallel computation can be used with great effect for this purpose [as well as for the calculation of the expected value in the expression (2.2)]. For some discrete control problems, integer programming techniques may also be used. Moreover, for deterministic problems with multistep lookahead, sophisticated exact or approximate shortest path methods may be considered; several methods of this type are available, such as label correcting methods, A∗ methods, and their variants (see the author’s books [Ber98] and [Ber17] for detailed accounts, which are consistent with the context of this chapter).

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

When the control constraint set is infinite, it may be replaced by a finite set through discretization. However, a more efficient alternative may be to use continuous space nonlinear programming techniques. This possibility can be attractive for deterministic problems, which lend themselves better to continuous space optimization; an example is the model predictive control context (see Section 2.5).

For stochastic problems and either one-step or multistep lookahead and continuous control spaces, the methodology of stochastic programming, which bears a close connection with linear and nonlinear programming methods, may be useful. We refer to the textbook [Ber17] for a discussion of its application to the approximate DP context, and references to the relevant literature. Still another possibility to simplify the one-step lookahead minimization (2.2) is based on Q-factor approximation, which is also suitable for model-free policy implementation, as we discuss next.

2.1.4

Model-Free Q-Factor Approximation in Value Space

One of the major aims of this book is to address stochastic model-free situations, i.e., methods where a mathematical model [the system functions fk , the probability distribution of wk , and the one-stage cost functions gk ]

is not used because it is either hard to construct, or simply inconvenient.

We assume instead that the system and cost structure can be simulated in software far more easily (think, for example, control of a queueing network with complicated but well-defined service disciplines at the queues).†

In this section, we will review some of the high-level ideas of passing from model-based to model-free policy implementations for stochastic problems. In particular, we assume that:

(a) There is a computer program/simulator that for any given state xk and control uk , simulates sample probabilistic transitions to a successor state xk+1 , and generates the corresponding transition costs.

(b) A cost function approximation J˜k+1 is available. Approaches to obtain J˜k+1 in model-free fashion will be discussed in the context of specific methods later. For example J˜k+1 may be obtained by solving a simpler problem for which a model is available, or it may be separately obtained without a mathematical model, by using a simulator.

We want to use the functions J˜k+1 and the simulator to compute or approximate the Q-factors n

o

E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

(2.4)

for all uk ∈ Uk (xk ), and then find the minimal Q-factor and corresponding one-step lookahead control.

† Another possibility is to use the real system to provide the next state and transition cost, but we will not deal explicitly with this case in this book.

Given a state xk , we may use the simulator to compute these Q-factors for all the pairs (xk , uk ), uk ∈ Uk (xk ), and then select the minimizing control. However, in many cases this can be very time-consuming. To deal with this difficulty, we may introduce a parametric family/approximation architecture of Q-factor functions, Q̃k (xk , uk , rk ), where rk is the parameter vector and use a least squares fit/regression to approximate the expected value that is minimized in Eq. (2.2). One possibility is to use a neural network parametric architecture; see Chapter 3, where we will discuss methods for selecting and training parametric architectures. The steps are as follows:

Summary of Q-Factor Approximation Based on Approximation in Value Space

Assume that the value of J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) is available for any given xk+1 :

(a) Use the simulator to collect a large number of “representative” sample state-control-successor states-stage cost quadruplets

(xsk , usk , xsk+1 , gks ), and corresponding sample Q-factors βks = gks + J˜k+1 (xsk+1 ),

s = 1, . . . , q.

(2.5)

Here xsk+1 is the simulator’s output of the next state xsk+1 = fk (xsk , usk , wks )

that corresponds to some disturbance wks . This disturbance also determines the one-stage-cost sample gks = gk (xsk , usk , wks ).

The simulator need not output wks ; only the sample next state xsk+1 and sample cost gks are needed (see Fig. 2.1.2).

(b) Determine the parameter vector r̄k by the least-squares regression q

X

2

(2.6)

r̄k ∈ arg min

Q̃k (xsk , usk , rk ) − βks .

rk

s=1

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

Sample State

Sample State

Sample Next State xsk+1

Sample State xsk

Sample

s k Simulator

State

Sample Control usk

) J˜k+1

Sample Q-Factor

SampleSample

State Q-Factor βks = gks + J˜k+1 (xsk+1 )

Sample Transition Cost gks

Figure 2.1.2 Schematic illustration of the simulator used for a model-free Qfactor approximation, assuming approximate cost functions J˜k+1 are known. The input to the simulator are sample state-control pairs (xsk , usk ), and the outputs are a next state sample xsk+1 and cost sample gks . These correspond to a disturbance wks according to xsk+1 = fk (xsk , usk , wks ),

gks = gk (xsk , usk , wks ).

The actual value of wks need not be output by the simulator. The sample Qfactors βks are generated according to Eq. (2.5), and are used in the least squares regression (2.6) to yield a parametric Q-factor approximation Q̃k and the policy implementation (2.7).

(c) Use the policy µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk , r̄k ).

(2.7)

Note some important points about the preceding procedure:

(1) It is model-free in the sense that it is based on Monte Carlo simulation. Moreover, it does not need the functions fk and gk , and the probability distribution of wk to generate the policy µ̃k through the least squares regression (2.6) and the Q-factor minimization (2.7).

The simulator to collect the samples (2.5) and the cost function approximation J˜k+1 suffice.

(2) Two approximations are potentially required: One to compute J˜k+1 , which is needed for the samples βks [cf. Eq. (2.5)], and another to compute Q̃k through the regression (2.6). The approximation methods to obtain J˜k+1 and Q̃k may be unrelated.

(3) The policy µ̃k obtained through the minimization (2.7) is not the same as the one obtained through the minimization (2.2). There are two reasons for this. One is the approximation error introduced by the Q-factor architecture Q̃k , and the other is the simulation error introduced by the finite-sample regression (2.6). We have to accept these sources of error as the price to pay for the convenience of not requiring a mathematical model for policy implementation.

Let us also mention a variant of the least squares minimization in

Eq. (2.6), which is to use a regularized minimization where a quadratic regularization term is added to the least squares objective. This term is a multiple of the squared deviation kr − r̂k2 of r from some initial guess r̂. Moreover, in some cases, a nonquadratic minimization may be used in place of Eq. (2.6) to determine r̄k , but in this book we will focus on least squares exclusively.

2.1.5 Approximation in Policy Space on Top of Approximation in Value Space

A common approach for approximation in policy space, is to introduce a parametric family of policies µ̃k (xk , rk ), where rk is a parameter vector.

The parametrization may involve a neural network as we will discuss in

Chapter 3. Alternatively, the parametrization may involve problem-specific features, exploiting the special structure of the problem at hand.

A general scheme for parametric approximation in policy space is to obtain a large number of sample state-control pairs (xsk , usk ), s = 1, . . . , q, such that for each s, usk is a “good” control at state xsk . We can then choose the parameter rk by solving the least squares/regression problem min rk

q

X

usk − µ̃k (xsk , rk )

(2.8)

s=1

(possibly with added regularization). In particular, we may determine usk using a human or a software “expert” that can choose “near-optimal” controls at given states, so µ̃k is trained to match the behavior of the expert.

Methods of this type are commonly referred to as supervised learning in artificial intelligence (see also the discussion in Section 4.11).

A special case of the above procedure, which connects with approximation in value space, is to generate the sample state-control pairs (xsk , usk )

through a one-step lookahead minimization of the form usk ∈ arg

min

u∈Uk (xk )

n

o

E gk (xsk , u, wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xsk , u, wk ) ,

(2.9)

where J˜k+1 is a suitable (separately obtained) approximation in value space; cf. Eq. (2.2), or an approximate Q-factor based minimization usk ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xs

)

k

Q̃k (xsk , uk , r̄k ),

(2.10)

[cf. Eq. (2.7)]. In this case, we collect the sample state-control pairs

(xsk , usk ), s = 1, . . . , q, by using approximation in value space through Eq.

(2.9) or Eq. (2.10), and then apply approximation in policy space through

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

Eq. (2.8) (i.e., approximation in policy space is built on top of approximation in value space).

A major advantage of schemes based on the minimization (2.8) is that once the parametrized policy is obtained, the on-line implementation of the policy is fast and does not involve extensive calculations such as minimizations of the form (2.9) or (2.10). This advantage is generally shared by schemes that are based on approximation in policy space.

2.1.6

When is Approximation in Value Space Effective?

An important question is what constitutes good approximating functions

J˜k in a one-step lookahead scheme. An answer that suggests itself is that

J˜k should be “close” to the optimal cost-to-go function Jk* for all k. This guarantees a certain degree of quality of the approximation scheme, but is neither necessary nor is it satisfied by all or even most good practical schemes.

For example if the approximating values J˜k (xk ) differ from the optimal values Jk* (xk ) uniformly by the same constant, the policy obtained by the approximation in value space scheme is optimal. This suggests that a better condition might be that relative values of J˜k and Jk* should be

“close” to each other, i.e.,

J˜k (xk ) − J˜k+ℓ (x′k ) ≈ Jk* (xk ) − Jk* (x′k ), for all pairs of states xk and x′k . Still, however, this guideline neglects the role of the first stage cost (or the cost of the first ℓ stages in the case of ℓ-step lookahead).

A more accurate predictor of good quality of the suboptimal policy obtained is that the Q-factor approximation error Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u)

changes gradually as u changes, where Qk and Q̃k denote the exactly optimal Q-factor and its approximation, respectively. For a heuristic explanation, suppose that approximation in value space generates a control ũk at a state xk where another control uk is optimal. Then we have

Q̃k (xk , uk ) − Q̃k (xk , ũk ) ≥ 0,

(2.11)

since ũk minimizes Q̃k (xk , ·), and

Qk (xk , ũk ) − Qk (xk , uk ) ≥ 0,

(2.12)

since uk minimizes Qk (xk , ·). If ũk is far from optimal, the Q-factor difference in Eq. (2.12) will be large, and by adding Eq. (2.11), it follows that the expression





Qk (xk , ũk ) − Q̃k (xk , ũk ) − Qk (xk , uk ) − Q̃k (xk , uk )

!

"

!

∈

"

Good approximation Poor Approximation

Good approximation Poor Approximation

) Qk (xk , u)

) Qk (xk , u)

Q̃k (xk , u)

Q̃k (xk , u)

ũk

) uk

u

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u)

ũk ) uk

u

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u)

Figure 2.1.3 Schematic illustration of the “slope” of the Q-factor approximation error as a predictor of quality of an approximation in value space scheme. At a given state xk , let uk be optimal, so that it minimizes Qk (xk , u) over u ∈ Uk (xk ), and let ũk be generated by approximation in value space, so that it minimizes

Q̃k (xk , u) over u ∈ Uk (xk ). In the figure on the right the approximation error

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u) changes gradually (i.e., has small “slope”), and ũk is a good choice, because Qk (xk , ũk ) is close the optimal Qk (xk , uk ). In the figure on the left the approximation error Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u) changes fast (i.e., has large “slope”), and ũk is a poor choice. In the extreme case where the Q-factors

Qk (xk , u) and Q̃k (xk , u) differ by a constant, minimization of either one of them yields the same result.

will be even larger. This is not likely to happen if the approximation error

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u) changes gradually (i.e., has small “slope”) for u in a neighborhood that includes uk and ũk (cf. Fig. 2.1.3). In many practical settings, as u changes, the corresponding changes in the approximate Qfactors Q̃k (xk , u) tend to have “similar” form to the changes in the exact Qfactors Qk (xk , u), thus providing some explanation for the observed success of approximation in value space in practice.

Of course, one would like to have quantitative tests to check the quality of either the approximate cost functions J˜k and Q-factors Q̃k , or the suboptimal policies obtained. However, general tests of this type are not available, and it is often hard to assess how a particular suboptimal policy compares to the optimal, except on a heuristic, problem-dependent basis. Unfortunately, this is a recurring difficulty in approximate DP/RL.

2.2 MULTISTEP LOOKAHEAD

The approximation in value space scheme that we have discussed so far is known as one-step lookahead, since it involves solving a one-step minimization problem at each time k [cf. Eq. (2.1)]. A more ambitious, but also computationally more intensive scheme is multistep lookahead .

As an example, in two-step lookahead we apply at time k and state xk , the control µ̃k (xk ) attaining the minimum in Eq. (2.1), where now

Sec. 2.2

Multistep Lookahead

At State xk

DP minimization

First ℓ Steps “Future”

min

uk ,µk+1 ,...,µk+ℓ−1

E

!

gk (xk , uk , wk ) +

k+ℓ−1

"

m=k+1

Steps “Future”

%

#
