Tesauro et al. [TGL13], Beyme and Leung [BeL14], Goodson, Thomas, and

Ohlmann [GTO15], Li and Womer [LiW15], Mastin and Jaillet [MaJ15],

Huang, Jia, and Guan [HJG16], Simroth, Holfeld, and Brunsch [SHB15], and Lan, Guan, and Wu [LGW16]. For a recent survey by the author, see [Ber13b]. These works discuss a broad variety of applications and case studies, and generally report positive computational experience.

The idea of rollout that uses limited lookahead, adaptive pruning of the lookahead tree, and cost function approximation at the end of the lookahead horizon was suggested by Tesauro and Galperin [TeG96] in the context of backgammon. Related ideas appeared earlier in the paper by Abramson

[Abr90], in a game playing context. The paper and monograph by Chang,

Hu, Fu, and Marcus [CFH05], [CFH13] proposed and analyzed adaptive sampling in connection with DP, including statistical tests to control the sampling process. The name “Monte Carlo tree search” (Section 2.4.2) has become popular, and in its current use, it encompasses a broad range of methods that involve adaptive sampling, rollout, extensions to sequential games, and the use and analysis of various statistical tests. We refer to the papers by Coulom [Cou06], the survey by Browne et al. [BPW12], and the discussion by Fu [Fu17]. The development of statistical tests for adaptive sampling has been influenced by works on multiarmed bandit problems; see the papers by Lai and Robbins [LaR85], Agrawal [Agr95], Burnetas and

Katehakis [BuK97], Meuleau and Bourgine [MeB99], Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer [ACF02], Peret and Garcia [PeG04], Kocsis and Szepesvari

[KoS06], and the monograph by Munos [Mun14]. The technique for variance reduction in the calculation of Q-factor differences (Section 2.4.2) was given in the author’s paper [Ber97].

The MPC approach is popular in a variety of control system design contexts, and particularly in chemical process control and robotics, where meeting explicit control and state constraints is an important practical issue. The connection of MPC with rollout algorithms was made in the author’s review paper [Ber05a]. The stability analysis given here is based on the work of Keerthi and Gilbert [KeG88]. For an early survey of the field, which gives many of the early references, see Morari and Lee [MoL99], and for a more recent survey see Mayne [May14]. For related textbooks, see Maciejowski [Mac02], Camacho and Bordons [CaB04], Kouvaritakis and

Cannon [KoC15], and Borelli, Bemporad, and Morari [BBM17].

In our account of MPC, we have restricted ourselves to deterministic problems possibly involving tight state constraints as well as control constraints. Problems with stochastic uncertainty and state constraints are more challenging because of the difficulty of guaranteeing that the constraints are satisfied; see the survey by Mayne [May14] for a review of various approaches that have been used in this context. The textbook [Ber17],

Section 6.4, describes MPC for problems with set membership uncertainty and state constraints, using target tube/reachability concepts, which originated in the author’s PhD thesis and subsequent papers [Ber71], [Ber72a],

[BeR71a], [BeR71b], [BeR73]. Target tubes were used subsequently in MPC and other contexts by several authors; see the surveys by Blanchini [Bla99]

Sec. 2.6

Notes and Sources

and Mayne [May14].

Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control by

Dimitri P. Bertsekas

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Chapter 3

This is Chapter 3 of the draft textbook “Reinforcement Learning and

Optimal Control.” The chapter represents “work in progress,” and it will be periodically updated. It more than likely contains errors (hopefully not serious ones). Furthermore, its references to the literature are incomplete.

Your comments and suggestions to the author at dimitrib@mit.edu are welcome. The date of last revision is given below.

The date of last revision is given below. (A “revision” is any version of the chapter that involves the addition or the deletion of at least one paragraph or mathematically significant equation.)

January 25, 2019

x

Contents

3.1. Approximation Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.1. Linear and Nonlinear Feature-Based Architectures

3.1.2. Training of Linear and Nonlinear Architectures .

3.1.3. Incremental Gradient and Newton Methods . . .

3.2. Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.1. Training of Neural Networks . . . . . . . . .

3.2.2. Multilayer and Deep Neural Networks . . . . .

3.3. Sequential Dynamic Programming Approximation . . .

3.4. Q-factor Parametric Approximation . . . . . . . . .

3.5. Notes and Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

p. 2 p. 2 p. 9 p. 10 p. 23 p. 27 p. 30 p. 34 p. 36 p. 39

Clearly, for the success of approximation in value space, it is important to select a class of lookahead functions J˜k that is suitable for the problem at hand. In the preceding chapter we discussed several methods for choosing J˜k based mostly on problem approximation, including rollout. In this chapter we discuss an alternative approach, whereby J˜k is chosen to be a member of a parametric class of functions, including neural networks, with the parameters “optimized” or “trained” by using some algorithm.

3.1 APPROXIMATION ARCHITECTURES

The starting point for the schemes of this chapter is a class of functions

J˜k (xk , rk ) that for each k, depend on the current state xk and a vector rk = (r1,k , . . . , rm,k ) of m “tunable” scalar parameters, also called weights.

By adjusting the weights, one can change the “shape” of J˜k so that it is a reasonably good approximation to the true optimal cost-to-go function Jk* .

The class of functions J˜k (xk , rk ) is called an approximation architecture, and the process of choosing the parameter vectors rk is commonly called training or tuning the architecture.

The simplest training approach is to do some form of semi-exhaustive or semi-random search in the space of parameter vectors and adopt the parameters that result in best performance of the associated one-step lookahead controller (according to some criterion). More systematic approaches are based on numerical optimization, such as for example a least squares fit that aims to match the cost approximation produced by the architecture to a “training set,” i.e., a large number of pairs of state and cost values that are obtained through some form of sampling process. Throughout this chapter we will focus on this latter approach.

3.1.1

Linear and Nonlinear Feature-Based Architectures

There is a large variety of approximation architectures, based for example on polynomials, wavelets, discretization/interpolation schemes, neural networks, and others. A particularly interesting type of cost approximation involves feature extraction, a process that maps the state xk into some vector φk (xk ), called the feature vector associated with xk at time k. The vector φk (xk ) consists of scalar components φ1,k (xk ), . . . , φm,k (xk ), called features. A feature-based cost approximation has the form



J˜k (xk , rk ) = Jˆk φk (xk ), rk ,

where rk is a parameter vector and Jˆk is some function. Thus, the cost approximation depends on the state xk through its feature vector φk (xk ).

Sec. 3.1

Approximation Architectures

i) Linear Cost

State xk i Feature Extraction kMapping

Feature Feature

Vector φVector

) Approximator rk′ φk (xk )

k (xk ) Approximator i) Linear Cost

Approximator

)

Feature

Extraction( Mapping

Feature Vector

Feature Extraction Mapping Feature Vector

Figure 3.1.1 The structure of a linear feature-based architecture. We use a feature extraction mapping to generate an input φk (xk ) to a linear mapping defined by a weight vector rk .

Note that we are allowing for different features φk (xk ) and different parameter vectors rk for each stage k. This is necessary for nonstationary problems (e.g., if the state space changes over time), and also to capture the effect of proximity to the end of the horizon. On the other hand, for stationary problems with a long or infinite horizon, where the state space does not change with k, it is common to use the same features and parameters for all stages. The subsequent discussion can easily be adapted to infinite horizon methods, as we will discuss in Chapter 4.

Features are often handcrafted, based on whatever human intelligence, insight, or experience is available, and are meant to capture the most important characteristics of the current state. There are also systematic ways to construct features, including the use of neural networks, which we will discuss shortly. In this section, we provide a brief and selective discussion of architectures, and we refer to the specialized literature

(e.g., Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [BeT96], Bishop [Bis95], Haykin [Hay09],

Sutton and Barto [SuB18]), and the author’s [Ber12], Section 6.1.1, for more detailed presentations.

One idea behind using features is that the optimal cost-to-go functions

Jk* may be complicated nonlinear mappings, so it is sensible to try to break their complexity into smaller, less complex pieces. In particular, if the features encode much of the nonlinearity of Jk* , we may be able to use a relatively simple architecture Jˆk to approximate Jk* . For example, with a well-chosen feature vector φk (xk ), a good approximation to the cost-to-go is often provided by linearly weighting the features, i.e., m

 X rℓ,k φℓ,k (xk ) = rk′ φk (xk ),

J˜k (xk , rk ) = Jˆk φk (xk ), rk =

(3.1)

ℓ=1

where rℓ,k and φℓ,k (xk ) are the ℓth components of rk and φk (xk ), respectively, and rk′ φk (xk ) denotes the inner product of rk and φk (xk ), viewed as column vectors of ℜm (a prime denoting transposition, so rk′ is a row vector; see Fig. 3.1.1).

This is called a linear feature-based architecture, and the scalar parameters rℓ,k are also called weights. Among other advantages, these architectures admit simpler training algorithms that their nonlinear counterparts.

Mathematically, the approximating function J˜k (xk , rk ) can be viewed as a

˜ r) = !m rℓ φℓ (x)

J(x, ℓ=1

rℓ rℓ rm

. . . r1

...

...

Sℓ

x S1

ℓ

Sm

)xS

Figure 3.1.2 Illustration of a piecewise constant architecture. The state space is partitioned into subsets S1 , . . . , Sm , with each subset Sℓ defining the feature φℓ (x) =

n

if x ∈ Sℓ , if x ∈

/ Sℓ ,

with its own weight rℓ .

member of the subspace spanned by the features φℓ,k (xk ), ℓ = 1, . . . , m, which for this reason are also referred to basis functions. We provide a few examples, where for simplicity we drop the index k.

Example 3.1.1 (Piecewise Constant Approximation)

Suppose that the state space is partitioned into subsets S1 , . . . , Sm , so that every state belongs to one and only one subset. Let the ℓth feature be defined by membership to the set Sℓ , i.e., φℓ (x) =

n

if x ∈ Sℓ , if x ∈

/ Sℓ .

Consider the architecture

J˜(x, r) =

m

X

rℓ φℓ (x),

ℓ=1

where r is the vector consists of the m scalar parameters r1 , . . . , rm . It can be seen that J˜(x, r) is the piecewise constant function that has value rℓ for all states within the set Sℓ ; see Fig. 3.1.2.

Sec. 3.1

Approximation Architectures

The piecewise constant approximation is an example of a linear feature-based architecture that involves exclusively local features. These are features that take a nonzero value only for a relatively small subset of states. Thus a change of a single weight causes a change of the value of

˜ r) for relatively few states x. At the opposite end we have linear

J(x, feature-based architectures that involve global features. These are features that take nonzero values for a large number of states. The following is an example.

Example 3.1.2 (Polynomial Approximation)

An important case of linear architecture is one that uses polynomial basis functions. Suppose that the state consists of n components x1 , . . . , xn , each taking values within some range of integers. For example, in a queueing system, xi may represent the number of customers in the ith queue, where i = 1, . . . , n. Suppose that we want to use an approximating function that is quadratic in the components xi . Then we can define a total of 1 + n + n2 basis functions that depend on the state x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) via φ0 (x) = 1,

φi (x) = xi ,

φij (x) = xi xj ,

i, j = 1, . . . , n.

A linear approximation architecture that uses these functions is given by

˜ r) = r0 +

J(x,

n

X

ri xi +

i=1

n n

X

X

rij xi xj ,

i=1 j=i

where the parameter vector r has components r0 , ri , and rij , with i = 1, . . . , n, j = k, . . . , n. Indeed, any kind of approximating function that is polynomial in the components x1 , . . . , xn can be constructed similarly.

A more general polynomial approximation may be based on some other known features of the state. For example, we may start with a feature vector

′

φ(x) = φ1 (x), . . . , φm (x) , and transform it with a quadratic polynomial mapping. In this way we obtain approximating functions of the form

˜ r) = r0 +

J(x,

m

X

ri φi (x) +

i=1

m m

X

X

rij φi (x)φj (x),

i=1 j=k

where the parameter r has components r0 , ri , and rij , with i, j = 1, . . . , m.

This can also be viewed as a linear architecture that uses the basis functions w0 (x) = 1,

wi (x) = φi (x),

wij (x) = φi (x)φj (x),

i, j = 1, . . . , m.

The preceding example architectures are generic in the sense that they can be applied to many different types of problems. Other architectures rely on problem-specific insight to construct features, which are then combibed into a relatively simple architecture. The following are two examples involving games.

Example 3.1.3 (Tetris)

Let us revisit the game of tetris, which we discussed in Example 1.3.4. We can model the problem of finding an optimal playing strategy as a finite horizon problem with a very large horizon.

In Example 1.3.4 we viewed as state the pair of the board position x and the shape of the current falling block y. We viewed as control, the horizontal positioning and rotation applied to the falling block. However, the DP algorithm can be executed over the space of x only, since y is an uncontrollable state component. The optimal cost-to-go function is a vector of huge dimension (there are 2200 board positions in a “standard” tetris board of width 10 and height 20). However, it has been successfully approximated in practice by low-dimensional linear architectures.

In particular, the following features have been proposed in [BeI96]: the heights of the columns, the height differentials of adjacent columns, the wall height (the maximum column height), the number of holes of the board, and the constant 1 (the unit is often included as a feature in cost approximation architectures, as it allows for a constant shift in the approximating function).

These features are readily recognized by tetris players as capturing important aspects of the board position.† There are a total of 22 features for a

“standard” board with 10 columns. Of course the 2200 × 22 matrix of feature values cannot be stored in a computer, but for any board position, the corresponding row of features can be easily generated, and this is sufficient for implementation of the associated approximate DP algorithms. For recent works involving approximate DP methods and the preceding 22 features, see

[Sch13], [GGS13], and [SGG15], which reference several other related papers.

Example 3.1.4 (Computer Chess)

Computer chess programs that involve feature-based architectures have been available for many years, and are still used widely (they have been upstaged in the mid-2010s by alternative types of chess programs that are based on neural network-based techniques that will be discussed later). These programs are based on approximate DP for minimax problems,‡ a feature-based parametric architecture, and multistep lookahead. For the most part, however, the computer chess training methodology has been qualitatively different from the parametric approximation methods that we consider in this book.

In particular, with few exceptions, the training of chess architectures has been done with ad hoc hand-tuning techniques (as opposed to some form of optimization). Moreover, the features have traditionally been hand-crafted

† The use of feature-based approximate DP methods for the game of tetris was first suggested in the paper [TsV96], which introduced just two features (in addition to the constant 1): the wall height and the number of holes of the board. Most studies have used the set of features described here, but other sets of features have also been used; see [ThS09] and the discussion in [GGS13].

‡ We have not discussed DP for minimax problems and two-player games, but the ideas of approximation in value space apply to these contexts as well; see

[Ber17] for a discussion that is focused on computer chess.

Sec. 3.1

Approximation Architectures

Feature Extraction Features: Material Balance,

Feature Extraction Features: Material Balance,

Mobility, Safety, etc Weighting of Features Score Position Evaluator

Mobility, Safety, etc Weighting of Features Score Position Evaluator

Feature Extraction

Features:

Balance,

Mobility, etcEvaluator

Mobility, Safety, etc Material

Weighting of Features

ScoreSafety,

Position

FeatureMobility,

Extraction

Features:

Material Balance,

Safety, etc Weighting of Features Score Position Evaluator

Figure 3.1.3 A feature-based architecture for computer chess.

based on chess-specific knowledge (as opposed to automatically generated through a neural network or some other method). Indeed, it has been argued that the success of chess programs in outperforming the best humans, can be more properly attributed to the brute-force calculating power of modern computers, which provides long and accurate lookahead, than to the ability of simulation-based algorithmic approaches, which can learn powerful playing strategies that humans have difficulty conceiving or executing. This assessment is changing rapidly following the impressive success of the AlphaZero chess program (Silver et al. [SHS17]). Still, however, computer chess with its use of long lookahead, provides an approximate DP paradigm that may be better suited for some practical contexts where a lot of computational power is available, but innovative and sophisticated algorithms are hard to construct.

The fundamental paper on which all computer chess programs are based was written by one of the most illustrious modern-day applied mathematicians, C. Shannon [Sha50]. Shannon proposed limited lookahead and evaluation of the end positions by means of a “scoring function” (in our terminology this plays the role of a cost function approximation). This function may involve, for example, the calculation of a numerical value for each of a set of major features of a position that chess players easily recognize (such as material balance, mobility, pawn structure, and other positional factors), together with a method to combine these numerical values into a single score. Shannon then went on to describe various strategies of exhaustive and selective search over a multistep lookahead tree of moves.

We may view the scoring function as a hand-crafted feature-based architecture for evaluating a chess position/state (cf. Fig. 3.1.3). In our earlier notation, it is a function of the form

˜ r) = Jˆ φ(x), r ,

J(x,



which maps a position x into a cost-to-go approximation Jˆ φ(x), r , a score whose value depends on the feature vector φ(x) of the position and a parameter vector r.†



˜ r) does not depend critically

† Because of the nature of the chess game, J(x,

In most computer chess programs, the features are weighted linearly, i.e., the architecture J˜(x, r) that is used for limited lookahead is linear [cf. Eq.

(3.1)]. In many cases, the weights are determined manually, by trial and error based on experience. However, in some programs, the weights are determined with supervised learning techniques that use examples of grandmaster play, i.e., by adjustment to bring the play of the program as close as possible to the play of chess grandmasters. This is a technique that applies more broadly in artificial intelligence; see Tesauro [Tes89], [Tes01]. An example is the Deepchess program by David, Netanyahu, and Wolf [DNW16], estimated to perform at a strong grandmaster level, which uses a deep neural network to extract features for use in another approximation architecture.

In a recent computer chess breakthrough, the entire idea of extracting features of a position through human expertise was abandoned in favor of feature discovery through self-play and the use of neural networks. The first program of this type to attain supremacy not only over humans, but also over the best computer programs that use human expertise-based features, was AlphaZero (Silver et al. [SHS17]). This program is based on DP principles of policy iteration, and Monte Carlo tree search. It will be discussed further in Chapter 4.

The next example considers a feature extraction strategy that is particularly relevant to problems of partial state information.

Example 3.1.5 (Feature Extraction from Sufficient Statistics)

The concept of a sufficient statistic, which originated in inference methodologies, plays an important role in DP. As discussed in Section 1.3, it refers to quantities that summarize all the essential content of the state xk for optimal control selection at time k.

In particular, consider a partial information context where at time k we have accumulated an information record

Ik = (z0 , . . . , zk , u0 , . . . , uk−1 ), which consists of the past controls u0 , . . . , uk−1 and state-related measurements z0 , . . . , zk obtained at the times 0, . . . , k, respectively. The control uk is allowed

 to depend only on Ik , and the optimal policy is a sequence of the form µ∗0 (I0 ), . . . , µ∗N−1 (IN−1 ) . We say that a function Sk (Ik ) is a sufficient statistic at time k if the control function µ∗k depends on Ik only through on the time (or move) index. The duration of the game is unknown and so is the horizon of the problem. We are dealing essentially with an infinite horizon minimax problem, whose termination time is finite but unknown, similar to the stochastic shortest path problems to be discussed in Chapter 4. Still, however, chess programs often use features and weights that depend on the phase of the game (opening, middlegame, or endgame). Moreover the programs include specialized knowledge, such as opening and endgame databases. In our discussion we will ignore such possibilities.

Sec. 3.1

Approximation Architectures

Sk (Ik ), i.e., for some function µ̂k , we have



µ∗k (Ik ) = µ̂k Sk (Ik ) .

where µ∗k is optimal.

There are several examples of sufficient statistics, and they are typically problem-dependent. A trivial possibility is to view Ik itself as a sufficient statistic, and a more sophisticated possibility is to view the belief state pk (Ik )

as a sufficient statistic (this is the conditional probability distribution of xk given Ik ; a more detailed discussion of these possibilities can be found in

[Ber17], Chapter 4).

Since the sufficient statistic contains all the relevant information for control purposes, an idea that suggests itself is to introduce features of the sufficient statistic and to train a corresponding approximation architecture accordingly. As examples of potentially good features, one may consider a partial history (such as the last m measurements and controls in Ik ), or some special characteristic of Ik (such as whether some alarm-like “special” event has been observed). In the case where the belief state pk (Ik ) is used as a sufficient statistic, examples of good features may be a point estimate based on pk (Ik ), the variance of this estimate, and other quantities that can be simply extracted from pk (Ik ) [e.g., simplified or certainty equivalent versions of pk (Ik )].

Unfortunately, in many situations an adequate set of features is not known, so it is important to have methods that construct features automatically, to supplement whatever features may already be available. Indeed, there are architectures that do not rely on the knowledge of good features.

One of the most popular is neural networks, which we will describe in

Section 3.2. Some of these architectures involve training that constructs simultaneously both the feature vectors φk (xk ) and the parameter vectors rk that weigh them.

3.1.2

Training of Linear and Nonlinear Architectures

The process of choosing the parameter vector r of a parametric architecture

˜ r) is generally referred to as training. The most common type of

J(x, training is based on a least squares optimization, also known as least squares regression. Here a set of state-cost training pairs (xs , β s ), s = 1, . . . , q, called the training set , is collected and r is determined by solving the problem q

X



˜ s , r) − β s 2 .

J(x

(3.2)

min r

s=1

Thus r is chosen to minimize the error between sample costs β s and the

˜ s , r) in a least squares sense. Here typically, architecture-predicted costs J(x there is some “target” cost function J that we aim to approximate with

˜ r), and the sample cost β s is the value J(xs ) plus perhaps some error

J(·, or “noise.”

The cost function of the training problem (3.2) is generally nonconvex, which may pose challenges, since there may exist multiple local minima.

However, for a linear architecture the cost function is convex quadratic, and the training problem admits a closed-form solution. In particular, for the linear architecture

˜ r) = r′ φ(x),

J(x, the problem becomes min r

q

X s=1

2 r′ φ(xs ) − β s .

By setting the gradient of the quadratic objective to 0, we have the linear equation q

X

 φ(xs ) r′ φ(xs ) − β s = 0, s=1

or

q

X

φ(xs )φ(xs )′ r =

q

X

φ(xs )β s .

s=1

s=1

Thus by matrix inversion we obtain the minimizing parameter vector r̂ =

q

X s=1

φ(xs )φ(xs )′

!−1

q

X

φ(xs )β s .

(3.3)

s=1

(Since sometimes the inverse above may not exist, an additional quadratic in r, called a regularization function, is added to the least squares objective to deal with this, and also to help with other issues to be discussed later.)

Thus a linear architecture has the important advantage that the training problem can be solved exactly and conveniently with the formula (3.3)

(of course it may be solved by any other algorithm that is suitable for linear least squares problems). By contrast, if we use a nonlinear architecture, such as a neural network, the associated least squares problem is nonquadratic and also nonconvex. Despite this fact, through a combination of sophisticated implementation of special gradient algorithms, called incremental , and powerful computational resources, neural network methods have been successful in practice as we will discuss in Section 3.2.

3.1.3

Incremental Gradient and Newton Methods

We will now digress to discuss special methods for solution of the least squares training problem (3.2), assuming a parametric architecture that

Sec. 3.1

Approximation Architectures

is differentiable in the parameter vector. This methodology is properly viewed as a subject in nonlinear programming and iterative algorithms, and as such it can be studied independently of the approximate DP methods of this book. Thus the reader who has already some exposure to the subject may skip to the next section, and return later as needed.
