Q̃k (xk , u, rk ),

(3.30)

without the need to calculate any expected value. This latter property is a primary incentive for using Q-factors in approximate DP, particularly when there are tight constraints on the amount of on-line computation that is possible in the given practical setting.

The samples βks in Eq. (3.29) involve the computation of an expected value. In an alternative implementation, we may replace βks with an average of just a few samples (even a single sample) of the random variable



′ gk (xsk , usk , wk ) + mins s rk+1 φk fk (xsk , usk , wk ), u , u∈Uk+1 (fk (xk ,uk ,wk ))

collected according to the probability distribution of wk . This distribution may either be known explicitly, or in a model-free situation, through a computer simulator; cf. the discussion of Section 2.1.4. In particular, to implement this scheme, we only need a simulator that for any pair

(xk , uk ) generates a sample of the stage cost gk (xk , uk , wk ) and the next state fk (xk , uk , wk ) according to the distribution of wk .

Having obtained the one-step lookahead policy π̃ = {µ̃0 , . . . , µ̃N −1 }, a further possibility is to approximate it with a parametric architecture.

This is approximation in policy space built on top of approximation in value space; see the discussion of Section 2.1.3. The idea here is to simplify even further the on-line computation of the suboptimal controls by avoiding the minimization of Eq. (3.30).

Finally, let us note an alternative to computing Q-factor approximations. It is motivated by the potential benefit of using Q-factor differences in contexts involving approximation. In this method, called advantage updating, instead of computing and comparing Q*k (xk , uk ) for all uk ∈ Uk (xk ), we compute

Ak (xk , uk ) = Q*k (xk , uk ) −

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q*k (xk , uk ).

The function Ak (xk , uk ) can serve just as well as Q*k (xk , uk ) for the purpose of comparing controls, but may have a much smaller range of values

Sec. 3.5

Notes and Sources

than Q*k (xk , uk ). In the absence of approximations, advantage updating is clearly equivalent to selecting controls by comparing their Q-factors. However, when approximation is involved, using Q-factor differences can be important, because Q*k (xk , uk ) may embody sizable quantities that are independent of u, and which may interfere with algorithms such as the fitted value iteration (3.28)-(3.29). This question is discussed further and is illustrated with an example in the neuro-dynamic programming book [BeT96],

Section 6.6.2.

3.5 NOTES AND SOURCES

Our discussion of approximation architectures, neural networks, and training has been limited, and aimed just to provide the connection with approximate DP and a starting point for further exploration. The literature on the subject is vast, and the textbooks mentioned in the references to

Chapter 1 provide detailed accounts and many references in addition to the ones given in Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2.1.

There are two broad directions of inquiry in parametric architectures:

(1) The design of architectures, either in a general or a problem-specific context. Research in this area has intensified following the increased popularity of deep neural networks.

(2) The algorithms for training of neural networks as well as linear architectures.

Both of these issues have been extensively investigated and research relating to these and other related issues is continuing.

Incremental algorithms are supported by substantial theoretical analysis, which addresses issues of convergence, rate of convergence, stepsize selection, and component order selection. It is beyond our scope to cover this analysis, and we refer to the book [BeT96] and paper [BeT00] by

Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, and the recent survey by Bottou, Curtis, and

Nocedal [BCN18] for theoretically oriented accounts. The author’s surveys

[Ber10] and [Ber15b], and convex optimization and nonlinear programming textbooks [Ber15a], [Ber16a], collectively contain an extensive account of theoretical and practical issues regarding incremental methods, including the Kaczmarz, incremental gradient, incremental subgradient, incremental aggregated gradient, incremental Newton, and incremental Gauss-Newton methods.

Fitted value iteration has a long history; it has been mentioned by

Bellman among others. It has interesting properties, and at times exhibits pathological behavior, such as instability over a long horizon. We will discuss this behavior in Section 4.4 in the context of infinite horizon problems.

Advantage updating (Section 3.4) was proposed by Baird [Bai93], [Bai94], and is discussed in Section 6.6 of the book [BeT96].

Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control by

Dimitri P. Bertsekas

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Chapter 4

This is Chapter 4 of the draft textbook “Reinforcement Learning and

Optimal Control.” The chapter represents “work in progress,” and it will be periodically updated. It more than likely contains errors (hopefully not serious ones). Furthermore, its references to the literature are incomplete.

Your comments and suggestions to the author at dimitrib@mit.edu are welcome.

The date of last revision is given below. (A “revision” is any version of the chapter that involves the addition or the deletion of at least one paragraph or mathematically significant equation.)

February 13, 2019

Infinite Horizon Reinforcement

Learning

Contents

4.1.

4.2.

4.3.

4.4.

4.5.

An Overview of Infinite Horizon Problems . . . . . . . p. 3

Stochastic Shortest Path Problems . . . . . . . . . . p. 6

Discounted Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 16

Exact and Approximate Value Iteration . . . . . . . . p. 21

Policy Iteration

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 25

4.5.1. Exact Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 26

4.5.2. Optimistic and Multistep Lookahead Policy Iteration p. 30

4.5.3. Policy Iteration for Q-factors . . . . . . . . . . p. 32

4.6. Approximation in Value Space - Performance Bounds . . p. 34

4.6.1. Limited Lookahead Performance Bounds . . . . . p. 36

4.6.2. Rollout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 39

4.6.3. Approximate Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . p. 43

4.7. Simulation-Based Policy Iteration with Parametric . . . . .

Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 46

4.7.1. Self-Learning and Actor-Critic Systems . . . . . p. 46

4.7.2. A Model-Based Variant . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 47

4.7.3. A Model-Free Variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 50

4.7.4. Implementation Issues of Parametric Policy Iteration p. 52

4.8. Q-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 55

4.9. Additional Methods - Temporal Differences . . . . . . p. 58

4.10. Exact and Approximate Linear Programming . . . . . p. 69

4.11. Approximation in Policy Space . . . . . . . . . . . p. 71

4.11.1. Training by Cost Optimization - Policy Gradient and

Random Search Methods . . . . . . . . . . . p. 73

4.11.2. Expert Supervised Training . . . . . . . . . . p. 80

4.12. Notes and Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 81

4.13. Appendix: Mathematical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . p. 84

4.13.1. Proofs for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems . . p. 85

4.13.2. Proofs for Discounted Problems . . . . . . . . p. 90

4.13.3. Convergence of Exact and Optimistic

. . . . . . .

Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 91

4.13.4. Performance Bounds for One-Step Lookahead, Rollout, and Approximate Policy Iteration . . . . . . . p. 93

Sec. 4.1

An Overview of Infinite Horizon Problems

In this chapter, we first provide an introduction to the theory of infinite horizon problems, and then consider the use of approximate DP/RL methods for suboptimal solution. Infinite horizon problems differ from their finite horizon counterparts in two main respects:

(a) The number of stages is infinite.

(b) The system is stationary, i.e., the system equation, the cost per stage, and the random disturbance statistics do not change from one stage to the next.

The assumption of an infinite number of stages is never satisfied in practice, but is a reasonable approximation for problems involving a finite but very large number of stages. The assumption of stationarity is often satisfied in practice, and in other cases it approximates well a situation where the system parameters vary relatively slowly with time.

Infinite horizon problems give rise to elegant and insightful analysis, and their optimal policies are often simpler than their finite horizon counterparts. For example, optimal policies are typically stationary, i.e., the optimal rule for choosing controls does not change from one stage to the next.

On the other hand, infinite horizon problems generally require a more sophisticated mathematical treatment. Our discussion will be limited to relatively simple finite-state problems. Still some theoretical results will be needed in this chapter. They will be explained intuitively to the extent possible, and their mathematical proofs will be provided in the end-ofchapter appendix.

4.1 AN OVERVIEW OF INFINITE HORIZON PROBLEMS

We will focus on two types of infinite horizon problems, where we aim to minimize the total cost over an infinite number of stages, given by

(N −1

)

X



Jπ (x0 ) = lim

;

αk g xk , µk (xk ), wk

E w

N →∞

k k=0,1,...

k=0

see Fig. 4.1.1. Here, Jπ (x0 ) denotes the cost associated with an initial state x0 and a policy π = {µ0 , µ1 , . . .}, and α is a positive scalar. The meaning of α < 1 is that future costs matter to us less than the same costs incurred at the present time.

Thus the infinite horizon costs of a policy is the limit of its finite horizon costs as the horizon tends to infinity. (We assume that the limit exists for the moment, and address the issue later.) The two types of problems, considered in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, respectively, are:

(a) Stochastic shortest path problems (SSP for short). Here, α = 1 but there is a special cost-free termination state; once the system reaches

) x0

...

) xk

Random Transition

State Infinite Horizon xk+1 = f (xk , uk , wkTermination

)

...

xk+1

) Random Cost

) αk g(xk , uk , wk )

Figure 4.1.1 Illustration of an infinite horizon problem. The syatem and cost per stage are stationary, except for the use of a discount factor α. If α = 1, there is typically a special cost-free termination state that we aim to reach.

that state it remains there at no further cost. We will assume a problem structure such that termination is inevitable. Thus the horizon is in effect finite, but its length is random and may be affected by the policy being used.

(b) Discounted problems. Here, α < 1 and there need not be a termination state. However, we will see that a discounted problem can be readily converted to an SSP problem. This can be done by introducing an artificial termination state to which the system moves with probability 1 − α at every stage, thus making termination inevitable.

As a result, our algorithms and analysis for SSP problems can be easily adapted to discounted problems.

A Preview of Infinite Horizon Theory

There are several analytical and computational issues regarding our infinite horizon problems. Many of them revolve around the relation between the optimal cost-to-go function J * of the infinite horizon problem and the optimal cost-to-go functions of the corresponding N -stage problems.

In particular, consider the SSP case and let JN (x) denote the optimal cost of the problem involving N stages, initial state x, cost per stage g(x, u, w), and zero terminal cost. This cost is generated after N iterations of the DP algorithm n

o

Jk+1 (x) = min E g(x, u, w) + Jk f (x, u, w) , u∈U(x) w

k = 0, 1, . . . , (4.1)

starting from the initial condition J0 (x) = 0 for all x.† The algorithm (4.1)

is known as the value iteration algorithm (VI for short). Since the infinite horizon cost of a given policy is, by definition, the limit of the corresponding

N -stage costs as N → ∞, it is natural to speculate that:

† This is just the finite horizon DP algorithm of Chapter 1. However, we have reversed the time indexing to suit our purposes. Thus the index of the cost functions produced by the algorithm is incremented with each iteration, and not decremented as in the case of finite horizon.

Sec. 4.1

An Overview of Infinite Horizon Problems

(1) The optimal infinite horizon cost is the limit of the corresponding

N -stage optimal costs as N → ∞; i.e.,

J * (x) = lim JN (x)

N →∞

(4.2)

for all states x.

(2) The following equation should hold for all states x, n

o

J * (x) = min E g(x, u, w) + J * f (x, u, w) .

u∈U(x) w

(4.3)

This is obtained by taking the limit as N → ∞ in the VI algorithm

(4.1) using Eq. (4.2). Equation (4.3) is really a system of equations

(one equation per state x), which has as solution the costs-to-go of all the states. It can also be viewed as a functional equation for the optimal cost function J * , and it is called Bellman’s equation.

(3) If µ(x) attains the minimum in the right-hand side of the Bellman equation (4.3) for each x, then the policy {µ, µ, . . .} should be optimal.

This type of policy is called stationary. Intuitively, optimal policies can be found within this class of policies, since the future optimization problem when starting at a given state looks the same regardless of the time when we start.

All three of the preceding results hold for SSP problems under our assumptions, as we will state later in Section 4.2 and prove in the appendix to this chapter. They also hold for discounted problems in suitably modified form that incorporates the discount factor. In fact the algorithms and analysis of this chapter are quite similar for SSP and discounted problems, to the point where we may discuss a particular method for one of the two problems with the understanding that its application to the other problem can be straightforwardly adapted.

Transition Probability Notation for Infinite Horizon Problems

Throughout this chapter we assume a finite-state discrete-time dynamic system, and we will use a special transition probability notation that is suitable for such a system. We generally denote states by the symbol i and successor states by the symbol j. We will assume that there are n states

(in addition to the termination state for SSP problems). These states are denoted 1, . . . , n, and the termination state is denoted t. The control u is constrained to take values in a given finite constraint set U (i), which may

depend on the current state i. The use of a control u at state i specifies the transition probability pij (u) to the next state j, at a cost g(i, u, j).†

Given an admissible policy π = {µ0 , µ1 , . . .} [one with µk (i) ∈ U (i)

for all i and k] and an initial state i0 , the system becomes a Markov chain whose generated trajectory under π, denoted {i0 , i1 , . . .}, has a well-defined probability distribution. The total expected cost associated with an initial state i is

(N −1

)

X



Jπ (i) = lim E αk g ik , µk (ik ), ik+1 i0 = i, π ,

N →∞

k=0

where α is either 1 (for SSP problems) or less than 1 for discounted problems. The expected value is taken with respect to the joint distribution of the states i1 , i2 , . . ., conditioned on i0 = i and the use of π. The optimal cost from state i, i.e., the minimum of Jπ (i) over all policies π, is denoted by J * (i).

The cost function of a stationary policy π = {µ, µ, . . .} is denoted by

Jµ (i). For brevity, we refer to π as the stationary policy µ. We say that µ is optimal if

Jµ (i) = J * (i) = min Jπ (i), π

for all states i.

As noted earlier, under our assumptions, we will show that there will always exist an optimal policy, which is stationary.

4.2 STOCHASTIC SHORTEST PATH PROBLEMS

In the SSP problem we assume that there is no discounting (α = 1), and that there is a special cost-free termination state t. Once the system reaches that state, it remains there at no further cost, i.e., ptt (u) = 1,

g(t, u, t) = 0,

for all u ∈ U (t).

We denote by 1, . . . , n the states other than the termination state t; see

Fig. 4.2.1.

With this notation, the Bellman equation (4.3) and the VI algorithm

(4.1) take the following form.

† To convert from the transition probability format to the system equation format used in the preceding chapters, we can simply use the system equation xk+1 = wk , where wk is the disturbance that takes values according to the transition probabilities pxk wk (uk ).

Sec. 4.2

Stochastic Shortest Path Problems

) pij (u)

pii (u)

αijt

) pjj (u)

ijt

u) pji (u)

) pjt (u)

pit (u)

ijt

) ptt (u) = 1

Figure 4.2.1 The transition graph of an SSP problem. There are n states, plus the termination state t, with transition probabilities pij (u). The termination state is cost-free and absorbing.

Bellman Equation and Value Iteration for SSP Problems:

For all i = 1, . . . , n, we have



J * (i) = min pit (u)g(i, u, t) + u∈U(i)

n

X j=1



 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + J * (j)  .

(4.4)

For all i = 1, . . . , n, and any initial conditions J0 (1), . . . , J0 (n), the VI algorithm generates the sequence {Jk } according to



Jk+1 (i) = min pit (u)g(i, u, t) + u∈U(i)

n

X j=1



 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + Jk (j)  .

(4.5)

The right-hand bracketed expression in the Bellman equation (4.4)

represents an expected value, which is similar to the expectation we have seen in earlier DP expressions. It is the sum of three terms:

(a) The contribution pit (u)g(i, u, t)

to the expected cost of the current stage of the terminating i-to-t transition.

(b) The contribution n

X j=1

pij (u)g(i, u, j)

to the expected cost of the current stage of the nonterminating i-to-j transitions.

(c) The optimal expected cost-to-go n

X

pij (u)J * (j)

j=1

starting from the next state j [if the next state is t, the corresponding optimal cost is J * (t), which is zero, so it does not appear in the sum].

Note that the deterministic shortest path problem of Section 1.3.1 is obtained as the special case of the SSP problem where for each state-control pair (i, u), the transition probability pij (u) is equal to 1 for a unique state j that depends on (i, u). Moreover, any deterministic or stochastic finitestate, finite horizon problem with a termination state (cf. Section 1.3.3)

can be converted to an SSP problem. In particular, the reader may verify that the finite-state N -step horizon problem of Chapter 1 can be obtained as a special case of an SSP problem by viewing as state the pair (xk , k)

and lumping all pairs (xN , N ) into a termination state t.

We are interested in problems where reaching the termination state t is inevitable. Thus, the essence of the problem is to reach t with minimum expected cost. Throughout this chapter, when discussing SSP problems, we will make the following assumption, which will be shown to guarantee eventual termination under all policies.†

† The main analytical and algorithmic results for SSP problems are valid under more general conditions, which involve the notion of a proper policy (see the end-of-chapter references). In particular, a stationary policy is called proper if starting from every state, it is guaranteed to eventually reach the destination.

The policy is called improper if it is not proper.

It can be shown that Assumption 4.2.1 is equivalent to the seemingly weaker assumption that all stationary policies are proper. However, the subsequent four propositions can also be shown under the genuinely weaker assumption that there exists at least one proper policy, and furthermore, every improper policy is “bad” in the sense that it results in infinite expected cost from at least one initial state

(see [BeT89], [BeT91], or [Ber12], Chapter 3). These assumptions, when specialized to deterministic shortest path problems, are similar to the assumptions of

Section 1.3.1. They imply that there is at least one path to the destination from every starting state and that all cycles have positive cost. In the absence of these assumptions, the Bellman equation may have no solution or an infinite number of solutions (see [Ber18a], Section 3.1.1 for discussion of a simple example, which in addition to t, involves a single state 1 at which we can either stay at cost a or move to t at cost b; anomalies occur when a = 0 and when a < 0).

Sec. 4.2

Stochastic Shortest Path Problems

Assumption 4.2.1: (Termination is Inevitable Under All Policies) There exists an integer m such that regardless of the policy used and the initial state, there is positive probability that the termination state will be reached after no more that m stages; i.e., for all admissible policies π we have ρπ = max P {xm 6= t | x0 = i, π} < 1.

i=1,...,n

Let ρ be the maximum probability of not reaching t, over all starting states and policies:

ρ = max ρπ .

π

Note that ρπ depends only on the first m components of the policy π.

Furthermore, since the number of controls available at each state is finite, the number of distinct m-stage policies is also finite. It follows that there can be only a finite number of distinct values of ρπ , so that ρ < 1.

This implies that the probability of not reaching t over a finite horizon diminishes to 0 as the horizon becomes longer , regardless of the starting state and policy used.

To see this, note that for any π and any initial state i

P {x2m 6= t | x0 = i, π} = P {x2m 6= t | xm 6= t, x0 = i, π}

· P {xm 6= t | x0 = i, π}

≤ ρ2 .

More generally, for each π, the probability of not reaching the termination state after km stages diminishes like ρk regardless of the initial state, i.e.,

P {xkm 6= t | x0 = i, π} ≤ ρk ,

i = 1, . . . , n.

(4.6)

This fact implies that the limit defining the associated total cost vector Jπ exists and is finite, and is central in the proof of the following results (given in the appendix to this chapter).

We now describe the main theoretical results for SSP problems; the proofs are given in the appendix to this chapter. Our first result is that the infinite horizon version of the DP algorithm, which is VI [cf. Eq. (4.1)], converges to the optimal cost function J * . The optimal cost J * (t) starting from t is of course 0, so it is just neglected where appropriate in the subsequent analysis. Generally, J * is obtained in the limit, after an infinite

number of iterations. However, there are important cases where convergence is obtained in finitely many iterations (see [Ber12], Chapter 3).

Proposition 4.2.1: (Convergence of

 VI) Given any initial conditions J0 (1), . . . , J0 (n), the sequence Jk (i) generated by the VI algorithm



Jk+1 (i) = min pit (u)g(i, u, t) + u∈U(i)

n

X j=1



 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + Jk (j)  ,

converges to the optimal cost J * (i) for each i = 1, . . . , n.

Our next result is that the limiting form of the DP equation, Bellman’s equation, has J * as its unique solution.

Proposition 4.2.2: (Bellman’s Equation) The optimal cost function



J * = J * (1), . . . , J * (n)

satisfies for all i = 1, . . . , n, the equation



J * (i) = min pit (u)g(i, u, t) + u∈U(i)

n

X j=1



 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + J * (j)  ,

(4.7)

and is the unique solution of this equation.

Our next result expresses that by restricting attention to a single policy µ, we obtain a Bellman equation specific to µ, which has Jµ as its unique solution.

Proposition 4.2.3: (VI and Bellman’s Equation for Policies)

For any stationary

 policy µ, the corresponding cost function Jµ =

Jµ (1), . . . , Jµ (n) satisfies for all i = 1, . . . , n the equation n
