and its discounted version

Jk+1 (i) = min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJk (j) .

(5.16)

It is one of the principal methods for calculating the optimal cost function

J *.

Unfortunately, when the number of states is large, the iterations

(5.15) and (5.16) may be prohibitively time consuming. This motivates an approximate version of VI, which is patterned after the least squares regression/fitted VI scheme of Section 3.3 for finite horizon problems. We start with some initial approximation to J * , call it J˜0 . Then we generate a sequence {J˜k } where J˜k+1 is equal to the exact value iterate T J˜k plus some error [we are using here the shorthand notation for the DP operator

T given in Eqs. (5.1) and (5.3). Assuming that values (T J˜k )(i) may be generated for sample states i, we may obtain J˜k+1 by some form of least squares regression. We will now discuss how the error (J˜k − J * ) is affected by this type of approximation process.

Error Bounds and Pathologies of Fitted Value Iteration

We will focus on fitted VI for discounted problems. The analysis for SSP problems is qualitatively similar. We first consider estimates of the cost function error

(5.17)

max J˜k (i) − J * (i) , i=1,...,n

and the policy error max

i=1,...,n

Jµ̃k (i) − J * (i) ,

(5.18)

Sec. 5.2

Fitted Value Iteration

where the policy µ̃k is obtained from the minimization µ̃k (i) ∈ arg min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ˜k (j) .

It turns out that such estimates are possible, but under assumptions whose validity may be hard to guarantee. In particular, it is natural to assume that the error in generating the value iterates (T J˜k )(i) is within some δ > 0 for every state i and iteration k, i.e., that max

i=1,...,n

J˜k+1 (i) − min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ˜k (j) ≤ δ.

(5.19)

It is then possible to show that asymptotically, as k → ∞, the cost error

(5.17) becomes less or equal to δ/(1 − α), while the policy error (5.18)

becomes less or equal to 2δ/(1 − α)2 .

Such error bounds are given in Section 6.5.3 of the book [BeT96] (see also Prop. 2.5.3 of [Ber12]), but it is important to note that the condition

(5.19) may not be satisfied by the natural least squares regression/fitted VI scheme of Section 3.3. This is illustrated by the following simple example from [TsV96] (see also [BeT96], Section 6.5.3), which shows that the errors from successive approximate value iterations can accumulate to the point where the condition (5.19) cannot be maintained, and the approximate value iterates J˜k can grow unbounded.

Example 5.2.1 (Error Amplification in Approximate Value

Iteration)

Consider a two-state discounted problem with states 1 and 2, and a single policy. The transitions are deterministic: from state 1 to state 2, and from state 2 to state 2. The transitions are also cost-free; see Fig. 5.2.1. Thus the

Bellman equation is

J(1) = αJ(2),

J(2) = αJ(2),

and its unique solution is J ∗ (1) = J ∗ (2) = 0. Moreover, exact VI has the form

Jk+1 (1) = αJk (2),

Jk+1 (2) = αJk (2).

We consider a VI approach that approximates cost functions within the one-dimensional subspace of linear functions S = (r, 2r) | r ∈ ℜ ; this is a favorable choice since the optimal cost function J ∗ = (0, 0) belongs to

S. We use a weighted least squares regression scheme. In particular, given

J˜k = (rk , 2rk ), we find J˜k+1 = (rk+1 , 2rk+1 ) as follows; see Fig. 5.2.2:

(a) We compute the exact VI iterate from J˜k :

T J˜k = αJ˜k (2), αJ˜k (2) = (2αrk , 2αrk ).



) Terminal State

2 01 Cost 1 u Cost

Termination State Infinite Horizon Bellman Eq: J(1) = αJ(2), J(2) = αJ(2)

J ∗ (1) = J ∗ (2) = 0 Exact VI :

a 1)2Terminal State 2 0

u Cost

1 = 0 Exact VI: Jk+1 (1) = αJk (2), Jk+1 (2) = αJk (2)

) Terminal State

2 01 Cost (2)

Figure 5.2.1 Illustration of the discounted problem of Example 5.2.1. There are two states, 1 and 2, and a single policy. The transitions are deterministic:

from state 1 to state 2, and from state 2 to state 2. These transitions are also cost-free.

(b) For some weights ξ1 , ξ2 > 0, we obtain the scalar rk+1 as

h

rk+1 ∈ arg min ξ1 r − (T J˜k )(1)

r

or

2

+ ξ2 2r − (T J˜k )(2)

rk+1 ∈ arg min ξ1 (r − 2αrk )2 + ξ2 (2r − 2αrk )2 .

r





2 i

,

To perform the preceding minimization, we write the corresponding optimality condition (set to zero the derivative with respect to r), and obtain after some calculation rk+1 = αζrk

where

ζ=

2(ξ1 + 2ξ2 )

> 1.

ξ1 + 4ξ2

(5.20)

Thus if ξ1 and ξ2 are chosen so that α > 1/ζ, the sequence {rk } diverges and so does {J˜k }. In particular, for the natural choice ξ1 = ξ2 = 1, we have ζ = 6/5, so the approximate VI scheme diverges for α in the range (5/6, 1);

see Fig. 5.2.2.

The difficulty here is that the approximate VI mapping that generates

J˜k+1 by a weighted least squares-based approximation of T J˜k is not a contraction (even though T itself is a contraction). At the same time there is no δ such that the condition (5.19) is satisfied for all k, because of error amplification in each approximate VI.

The preceding example indicates that the choice of the least squares weights is important in determining the success of least squares-based approximate VI schemes. Generally, in regression-based parametric architecture training schemes of the type discussed is Section 3.1.2, the weights are related to the way samples are collected: the weight ξi for state i is the proportion of the number of samples in the least squares summation that correspond to state i. Thus ξ1 = ξ2 = 1 in the preceding example means that we use an equal number of samples for each of the two states 1 and 2.

˜ ·) and a samNow let us consider an approximation architecture J(i, pling process for approximating the value iterates. In particular, let

˜ rk ),

J˜k (i) = J(i,

i = 1, . . . , n,

Sec. 5.2

Fitted Value Iteration

Range of Weighted Projections

Range of Weighted Projections

Termination State Infinite Horizon Approximation Subspace

) Exact VI iterate Approximate

) Exact VI iterate Approximate

Orthogonal Projection

) Exact VI iterate J˜k+1

J˜k = (rk , 2rk ) Exact VI iterate

) Exact VI iterate J

(2) (2αrk , 2αrk )

) Terminal State 2 0 J ∗ = (0, 0)

π/4 Sample State

Figure

 5.2.2 Illustration of Example 5.2.1. Iterates of approximate VI lie on the line (r, 2r) | r ∈ ℜ . Given an iterate J˜k = (rk , 2rk ), the next exact VI iterate is

 αJ˜k (2), αJ˜k (2) = (2αrk , 2αrk ).

The approximation of this iterate on the line {(r, 2r) | r ∈ ℜ} by least squares regression can be viewed as weighted projection onto the line, and depends on the weights (ξ1 , ξ2 ). The range of weighted projections as the weights vary is shown in the figure. For the natural choice ξ1 = ξ2 = 1 and α sufficiently close to 1, the new approximate VI iterate J˜k+1 is further away from J ∗ = (0, 0) than J˜k .

The difficulty here is that the mapping that consists of a VI followed by weighted projection onto the line {(r, 2r) | r ∈ ℜ} need not be a contraction.

where rk is the parameter vector corresponding to iteration k. Then the parameter rk+1 used to represent the next value iterate as

˜ rk+1 ),

J˜k+1 (i) = J(i,

i = 1, . . . , n,

is obtained by the minimization rk+1 ∈ arg min r

q

X s=1



˜ s , r) − β s 2 ,

J(i

(5.21)

where (is , β s ), s = 1, . . . , q, is a training set with each β s being the value iterate at the state is :

β s = (T J˜k )(is ).

The critical question now is how to select the sample states is , s =

1, . . . , q, to guarantee that the iterates rk remain bounded, so that a condition of the form (5.19) is satisfied and the instability illustrated with Example 5.2.1 is avoided. It turns out that there is no known general method

to guarantee this in infinite horizon problems. However, some practical methods have been developed. One such method is to weigh each state according to its “long-term importance,” i.e., proportionally to the number of its occurrences over a long trajectory under a “good” heuristic policy.† To implement this, we may run the system with the heuristic policy starting from a number of representative states, wait for some time for the system to approach steady-state, and record the generated states is , s = 1, . . . , q, to be used in the regression scheme (5.21). There is no theoretical guarantee for the stability of this scheme in the absence of additional conditions:

it has been used with success in several reported case studies, although its rationale has only a tenuous basis in analysis. For a discussion of this issue, we refer to [Ber12], Section 6.3, and other end-of-chapter references.

We finally note that in the absence of special modifications, optimistic PI with approximations is also subject to the error amplification phenomenon illustrated in Example 5.2.1. Indeed approximate VI, as described in Section 4.4, can be viewed as a special case of an optimistic PI method, where each policy evaluation is done with a single VI, and then approximated by least squares/regression.

5.3 SIMULATION-BASED POLICY ITERATION WITH

PARAMETRIC APPROXIMATION

In this section we will discuss PI methods where the policy evaluation step is carried out with the use of a parametric approximation method and

Monte-Carlo simulation. We will focus on the discounted problem, but similar methods can be used for the SSP problem.

5.3.1

Self-Learning and Actor-Critic Systems

The name “self-learning” in RL usually refers to some form of PI method that involves the use of simulation for approximate policy evaluation, and/or approximate Q-factor evaluation. A parametric architecture is used for this, and the algorithm that performs the policy evaluation is usually called a critic. If a neural network is used as the parametric architecture, it is called a critic network . The PI algorithm generates a sequence of stationary policies {µk } and a corresponding sequence of approximate cost function evaluations {J˜µk } using a simulator of the system.

† In the preceding Example 5.2.1, weighing the two states according to their

“long-term importance” would choose ξ2 to be much larger than ξ1 , since state

2 is “much more important,” in the sense that it occurs almost exclusively in system trajectories. Indeed, from Eq. (5.20) it can be seen that when the ratio ξ1 /ξ2 is close enough to 0, the scalar ζ is close enough to 1, making the scalar αζ strictly less than 1, and guaranteeing convergence of J˜k to J ∗ .

Sec. 5.3

Simulation-Based Policy Iteration

As in all PI methods, the policy evaluation J˜µk is used for policy improvement, to generate the next policy µk+1 . The algorithm that performs the policy improvement is usually called an actor , and if a neural network is involved, it is called an actor network .

The two operations needed at each policy iteration are as follows:

(a) Evaluate the current policy µk (critic): Here algorithm, system, and simulator are merged in one, and the system “observes itself” by generating simulation cost samples under the policy µk . It then combines these samples to “learn” a policy evaluation J˜µk . Usually this is done through some kind of incremental method that involves a least squares minimization/regression using cost samples, and either a linear architecture or a neural network.

(b) Improve the current policy µk (actor): Given the approximate policy evaluation J˜µk , the system can generate or “learn” the new policy µk+1 through the minimization µk+1 (i) ∈ arg min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ˜µk (j) ,

i = 1, . . . , n.

Alternatively the system can compute the minimizing control us at a set of sample states is , s = 1, . . . , q, through us

∈ arg mins

u∈U(i )

n

X j=1

 pis j (u) g(is , u, j) + αJ˜µk (j) .

These are the sample values of the improved policy µk+1 at the sample states is . They are generalized to “learn” a complete policy µk+1 by using some approximation in policy space scheme (cf. Section 2.1.3).

We can thus describe simulation-based PI as a process where the system learns better and better policies by observing its behavior . This is true up to the point where either policy oscillations occur (cf. Fig. 5.1.4) or the algorithm terminates (cf. Fig. 5.1.5), at which time learning essentially stops.

It is worth noting that the system learns by itself, but it does not learn itself, in the sense that it does not construct a mathematical model for itself . It only learns to behave better, i.e., construct improved policies, through experience gained by simulating state and control trajectories generated with these policies. We may adopt instead an alternative two-phase approach: first use system identification and simulation to construct a mathematical model of the system, and then use a model-based

PI method. However, we will not discuss system identification and the construction of models in this book.

Initial Policy Controlled System Cost per Stage Vector tion Matrix ( )

∈

Approximate

Policy

Evaluate Approximate Cost Steady-State

Distribution

˜

Cost

(

)

Evaluation

} Jµ (i, r) of Current Policy µ

!

Critic Actor

∈

∈ µ̃ by

Generate “Improved” Policy

Policy Improvement by Lookahead Min} Based on J˜µ (i, r) Critic Actor

!

Figure 5.3.1 Block diagram of model-based approximate PI for cost functions.

5.3.2

A Model-Based Variant

We will first provide an example of a model-based PI method that is conceptually simple, and then discuss its model-free version. In particular, we assume that the transition probabilities pij (u) are available, and that the cost function Jµ of any given policy µ is approximated using a parametric architecture J˜µ (i, r).

We recall that given any policy µ, the exact PI algorithm for costs generates the new policy µ̃ with a policy evaluation/policy improvement process. We approximate this process as follows; see Fig. 5.3.1.

(a) Approximate policy evaluation: To evaluate µ, we determine the value of the parameter vector r by generating a large number of training pairs (is , β s ), s = 1, . . . , q, and by using least squares training:

r ∈ arg min r

q

X s=1

2

J˜µ (is , r) − β s .

(5.22)

For a given state is , the scalar β s is a sample cost corresponding to is and µ.

In particular β s is generated by starting at is , simulating a trajectory of states and controls using µ and the known transition probabilities for some number N of stages, accumulating the corresponding discounted costs, and adding a terminal cost approximation

ˆ N ), αN J(i

Sec. 5.3

Simulation-Based Policy Iteration

where iN is the terminal state of the N -stage trajectory and Jˆ is some initial guess of Jµ . The guess Jˆ may be obtained with additional training or some other means, such as using the result of the policy evaluation of the preceding policy µk−1 ; this is similar to the cost function approximation implicitly used in optimistic policy iteration, cf. Section 4.5.2. It is also possible to simplify the method by using

ˆ N ) = 0, or obtaining Jˆ via a problem approximation process.†

J(i

The approximate policy evaluation problem of Eq. (5.22) can be solved with the incremental methods discussed in Section 3.1.3. In particular the incremental gradient method is given by



˜ sk , rk ) J˜(isk , rk ) − β sk , rk+1 = rk − γ k ∇J(i

where (isk , β sk ) is the state-cost sample pair that is used at the kth iteration, and r0 is an initial parameter guess. Here the approximation

˜ r) may be linear or may be nonlinear and differenarchitecture J(i, tiable. In the case of a linear architecture it is also possible to solve the problem (5.22) in closed form, i.e., by using an exact linear least squares formula.

(b) Approximate policy improvement : Having solved the approximate policy evaluation problem (5.22), the new “improved” policy µ̃ is obtained by the approximate policy improvement operation µ̃(i) ∈ arg min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ˜(j, r) ,

i = 1, . . . , n,

(5.23)

where r is the parameter vector obtained from the policy evaluation operation (5.22).

Trajectory Reuse and Bias-Variance Tradeoff

As we have noted, to each training pair (is , β s ) there corresponds an N stage trajectory over which the sample cost β s is accumulated, but the length of the trajectory may depend on s. This allows sampling effort economies based on trajectory reuse. In particular, suppose that starting at some state i0 we generate a long trajectory (i0 , i1 , . . . , iN ) using the policy µ. Then we can obtain the state-cost sample that corresponds to i0 , as discussed above, but we can also obtain additional cost samples for

† The choice of the terminal cost function approximation Jˆ may pose difficulties in SSP problems, particularly when most of the cost is incurred upon termination. Dealing with this issue may be problem-dependent. It will not be discussed in this book.

the subsequent states i1 , i2 , etc, by using the tail portions of the trajectory

(i0 , i1 , . . . , iN ) that start at these states.

Clearly, it is necessary to truncate the sample trajectories to some number of stages N , since we cannot simulate an infinite length trajectory in practice. If N is large, then because of the discount factor, the error for neglecting the stage costs beyond stage N will be small. However, there are other important concerns when choosing the trajectory lengths N .

In particular, a short length reduces the sampling effort, but is also a source of inaccuracy. The reason is that the cost of the tail portion of the

ˆ N ), where trajectory (from stage N to infinity) is approximated by αN J(i

ˆ iN is the terminal state of the N -stage trajectory and J is the initial guess of Jµ . This terminal cost compensates for the costs of the neglected stages in the spirit of optimistic PI, but adds an error to the cost samples β s , which becomes larger as the trajectory length N becomes smaller.

We note two additional benefits of using many training trajectories, each with a relatively short trajectory length:

(1) The cost samples β s are less noisy, as they correspond to summation of fewer random stage costs. This leads to the so-called bias-variance tradeoff : short trajectories lead to larger bias but smaller variance of the cost samples.

(2) With more starting states i0 , there is better opportunity for exploration of the state space. By this we mean adequate representation of all possible initial trajectory states in the sample set. This is a major issue in approximate PI, as we will discuss in Section 5.3.4.

Let us also note that the bias-variance tradeoff underlies the motivation for a number of alternative policy evaluation methods such as TD(λ),

LSTD(λ), and LSPE(λ), which we will summarize in Section 5.5; see Section 6.3 of the book [Ber12] and other approximate DP/RL books referenced earlier. The papers [Ber11b], [YuB12], and the book [Ber12], Section

6.4, discuss a broad range of short trajectory sampling methods.

5.3.3

A Model-Free Variant

We will now provide an example model-free PI method. Let us restate the PI method in terms of Q-factors, and in a form that involves approximations and simulation-based implementations. We recall that given any policy µ, the exact PI algorithm for Q-factors (cf. Section 4.5.3) generates the new policy µ̃ with a policy evaluation-policy improvement process.

To this end, we introduce a parametric architecture Q̃µ (i, u, r) for the Q-factors of µ. This architecture may involve a neural network, or a feature-based linear architecture. The feature vector may depend on just the state, or on both the state and the control. In the former case, the architecture has the form

Q̃µ (i, u, r) = r(u)′ φ(i),

(5.24)

Sec. 5.3

Simulation-Based Policy Iteration

Initial Policy Controlled System Cost per Stage Vector tion Matrix ( )

µ

Evaluate Approximate Q-Factors Approximate Policy

Approximate

Policy Evaluation

Evaluation

) Q̃µ (i, u, r) of Current Policy µ

Critic Actor

Generate “Improved” Policy µ̃ by µ̃(i) ∈ arg minu∈U (i) Q̃µ (i, u, r)

Policy Improvement

Critic Actor

Figure 5.3.2 Block diagram of model-free approximate PI for Q-factors.

where r(u) is a separate weight vector for each control u. In the latter case, the architecture has the form

Q̃µ (i, u, r) = r′ φ(i, u),

(5.25)

where r is a weight vector that is independent of u. The architecture (5.24)

is suitable for problems with a relatively small number of control options at each stage.

We approximate this process as follows; see Fig. 5.3.2.

(a) Approximate policy evaluation: Here we determine the value of the parameter vector r by generating (using a simulator of the system)

a large number of training triplets (is , us , β s ), s = 1, . . . , q, and by using a least squares fit:

r ∈ arg min r

q

X s=1

2

Q̃µ (is , us , r) − β s .

(5.26)

In particular, for a given pair (is , us ), the scalar β s is a sample Qfactor corresponding to (i, u). It is generated by starting at is , using us at the first stage, and simulating a trajectory of states and controls using µ for a total of N stages, and accumulating the corresponding s s discounted costs. Thus, β s is a sample of QN µ (i , u ), the N -stage

Q-factor of µ, given by

QN µ (i, u) =

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJµN −1 (j) ,

where JµN −1 (j) is the (N − 1)-stages cost of µ starting at j. The number of stages N in the sample trajectories may be different for different samples, and can be either large, or fairly small. Moreover,

ˆ N ) may be added to β s as in a terminal cost approximation αN J(i the model-based case of Section 5.3.2. Again an incremental method may be used to solve the training problem (5.26).

(b) Approximate policy improvement : Here we compute the new policy µ̃ according to µ̃(i) ∈ arg min Q̃µ (i, u, r), u∈U(i)

i = 1, . . . , n,

(5.27)

where r is the parameter vector obtained from the policy evaluation operation (5.26).

Unfortunately, trajectory reuse is more problematic in Q-factor evaluation than in cost evaluation, because each trajectory generates statecontrol pairs of the special form i, µ(i) at every stage after the first, so pairs (i, u) with u 6= µ(i) are not adequately explored ; cf. the discussion in

Section 5.3.2. For this reason, it is necessary to make an effort to include in the samples a rich enough set of trajectories that start at pairs (i, u)

with u 6= µ(i). We discuss this issue in Section 5.3.4.

An important alternative to the preceding procedure is a two-stage process for policy evaluation: first compute in model-free fashion a cost function approximation J˜µ (j, r), using the regression (5.22), and then use a second sampling process and regression to approximate further the (already approximate) Q-factor n
