1

An Introduction to Zero-Order Optimization
Techniques for Robotics

arXiv:2506.22087v2 [cs.RO] 10 Oct 2025

Armand Jordana, Jianghan Zhang, Joseph Amigo and Ludovic Righetti

Abstract—Zero-order optimization techniques are becoming
increasingly popular in robotics due to their ability to handle nondifferentiable functions and escape local minima. These advantages make them particularly useful for trajectory optimization
and policy optimization. In this work, we propose a mathematical
tutorial on random search. It offers a simple and unifying perspective for understanding a wide range of algorithms commonly
used in robotics. Leveraging this viewpoint, we classify many
trajectory optimization methods under a common framework
and derive novel competitive RL algorithms.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, zero-order (or derivative-free) optimization techniques [1] have gained a lot of popularity in the
robotics community. While zero-order optimization is a wellestablished field, its widespread deployment in robotics has
only been made possible by recent advances in parallel computing and GPU hardware. These improvements have made
it possible to deploy sampling-based Model Predictive Control (MPC) on complex robotic systems [2], [3]. In parallel,
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful tool
and has demonstrated state-of-the-art capabilities in locomotion or manipulation [4], [5].
While these approaches may appear unrelated at first,
they share a common property: they do not require access
to the simulator’s gradients. This characteristic allows them
to optimize non-smooth objective functions, which typically
arise in problems involving contact, such as locomotion or
manipulation. Another benefit is that it avoids the tedious development of efficient gradient implementations. Furthermore,
while deterministic gradient-based algorithms, such as gradient
descent or Newton’s method, are prone to getting stuck in local
minima, zero-order techniques are mostly stochastic, which
can help escape local minima.
Zero-order optimization has a long history [6]. In its most
generic form, zero-order optimization performs a random
search by generating samples at random and updating an
estimate of the optimal solution based on the performance
of each sample. In the 1970s, Evolutionary Strategies (ES)
gained popularity [7] and later culminated with the CMAES algorithm [8]. In TO, predictive sampling [9] is a wellknown and simple random search technique. Another popular
algorithm is MPPI [10], which was initially derived using
information-theoretic arguments. In RL, Reinforce [11] was
one of the first major algorithms proposed for continuous
action space problems. These algorithms have since inspired
many variations.
All the authors are part of the Machines in Motion Laboratory, New York
University, USA.
Corresponding author: armand.jordana@nyu.edu

While most of these algorithms have strong theoretical
foundations, this is not always widely recognized within
the robotics community. One reason for this is that these
algorithms often lie at the intersection of many fields, such
as optimization, statistics, machine learning, and control. By
bringing together results from these areas, our goal is both to
bring to light the theoretical properties of existing algorithms
and to leverage this understanding to design novel algorithms
for robotics.
Recently, [12] introduced Gaussian smoothing and understood random search from an optimization perspective.
Inspired by this work, we propose a unified perspective to
understand the zero-order optimization techniques that are
popular in the robotics community. More specifically, we are
interested in algorithms that can find solutions to the following
problem:
min f (x).

x∈Rn

(1)

This formulation encompasses a wide range of problems
encountered in robotics, such as TO and RL. Both of these
techniques define a high-level goal through a cost function
that has to be minimized (or a reward function that has
to be maximized). However, they differ in the optimization
space. TO optimizes directly over trajectories (i.e. a finitedimensional sequence of vectors), whereas RL optimizes over
policies (i.e. functions, which are infinite-dimensional objects).
Furthermore, they differ in the way they are deployed. These
algorithms can be used either online (i.e. executed at runtime)
or offline. On one hand, TO can either be solved online in an
MPC loop or solved offline to generate data to train a policy.
On the other hand, recent RL successes relied heavily on
offline training in simulation [4], [5]. While these differences
may seem fundamental, we show that the algorithms used to
solve these problems share many conceptual similarities.
In the trajectory optimization community, several works
have studied derivative-free algorithms and established connections among them. For instance, [13] first showed the
similarities between MPPI and CMA-ES. Later, [14] understood MPPI as an approximate gradient method and [3]
connected MPPI to diffusion models. Our work builds on these
insights and proposes a unifying framework to understand
these algorithms. In addition, we shed light on the connection
between MPPI and recent results showcasing the benefits of
the log-sum-exp transform [15]. Lastly, we benchmark several
state-of-the-art approaches on various robotic examples.
In the RL community, [16], [17] first explored the use
of random search in the parameter space of policies as an
alternative to traditional RL algorithms. In this work, we

2

instead investigate how random search techniques can explain
the success of popular RL algorithms. More recently, [18], [19]
drew the connection between policy gradient techniques and
Nesterov’s random search [12]. However, these works used
this insight to derive TO algorithms based on random search.
In contrast, we study how to leverage this understanding to
derive novel RL algorithms. Lastly, we refer the reader to [20],
[21] for comprehensive surveys on the connection between RL
and ES techniques.
Overall, a broad perspective connecting gradient-free approaches in TO and RL is missing. To bridge this gap,
we propose a mathematical introduction to zero-order optimization algorithms used in robotics. This unified treatment
provides a simple way to understand techniques such as MPPI,
Covariance Matrix Adaptation (CMA), and RL policy gradient
methods. In addition, we show how this unified view allows us
to naturally derive novel competitive methods as a byproduct.
Lastly, we discuss the theoretical concepts explaining why
stochastic algorithms are well-suited to avoid getting stuck
in local minima.
Section II introduces the main concepts of random search
and sampling-based gradient approximation. Section III connects popular TO algorithms to random search. Section IV
investigates the connections between Gaussian smoothing and
RL. Section V discusses how to improve the sample efficiency
of these algorithms by relying on a population of samples.
Lastly, Section VI briefly reviews existing parallel computing
libraries.
II. R ANDOM SEARCH
In this section, we introduce how a population of samples
(or particles) can be used to search for global solutions. The
algorithms presented here will serve as building blocks for
the understanding of widely used TO and RL algorithms.
Depending on the context, the samples may correspond to
trajectories in TO or to policy parameters in RL.
A. Simple random search
First, we study two basic random search approaches: global
search and local search algorithms. Although rarely used in
practice, their convergence guarantees help to understand more
sophisticated algorithms.
1) Pure (or Global) Random Search: The most naive
random search approach consists of iteratively sampling points
at random. If the sampled point has a value lower than the
current best, it is kept as the new best guess; otherwise, it
is discarded. This method, known as Pure Random Search, is
summarized in Algorithm 1.
Interestingly, the sampling distribution of Algorithm 1 ignores all the previous estimates. For this reason, it is sometimes referred to as a global algorithm. Under some mild
conditions on the objective function, Algorithm 1 converges to
a global minimum [22]. Unfortunately, in practice, this method
performs poorly as it is subject to the curse of dimensionality.
That is to say, the number of function evaluations required to
find a global solution grows exponentially with the dimension
of the problem.

Algorithm 1: Pure Random Search
Input: x0 ∈ Rn
1 x ← x0
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample x̃ in Rn
4
if f (x̃) < f (x) then
5
x ← x̃
Output: x

2) Greedy Local Search: A common attempt to break the
curse of dimensionality is to exploit problem-specific knowledge. For instance, exploiting previous information about the
shape of the function can help design an empirically more
efficient algorithm. This is called Greedy Local Search. The
idea is to iteratively search around the previous estimate with
additive Gaussian noise, for instance. Then, as in the previous
algorithm, the sample is kept only if it improves the function
value. Algorithm 2 summarizes the procedure.
Algorithm 2: Greedy Local Search
Input: x0 ∈ Rn , Σ
1 x ← x0
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample d with N (0, Σ)
4
if f (x + d) < f (x) then
5
x←x+d
Output: x
By design, Algorithm 2 depends on previous estimates.
For that reason, it can be referred to as a local algorithm.
However, this notion should not be confused with the concepts
of local and global solutions. In fact, although the convergence
guarantees of Algorithm 2 are more restrictive than those
of Algorithm 1, it is still possible to prove the convergence
of Algorithm 2 to a global solution under some regularity
conditions [22]. Consequently, both local and global searches
can have global convergence guarantees. However, while both
are subject to the curse of dimensionality, local search techniques can be more effective empirically. In fact, as we show
next, it is well known that local search techniques relying on
gradient information can exhibit strong convergence rates and
guarantees in convex settings.

B. Random search via gradient approximation
In this section, we present various ways to perform approximate gradient descent using only function evaluations. In later
sections, we show how widely used algorithms in TO and RL
can be derived from the basic principles introduced here. The
class of methods under study is summarized in Algorithm 3.
Here, α is the step size (or learning rate). There are
many ways to estimate the gradient with multiple function

3

While both approaches lead to effective algorithms, the next
technique provides a more insightful interpretation.
3) Gaussian Smoothing: [12] propose another perspective.
Instead of directly approximating the gradients of the original
function, they propose studying a smoothed surrogate function

Algorithm 3: Approximate Gradient Descent
Input: x0 ∈ Rn
1 x ← x0
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample g approximating the gradient at x. // e.g.
Eq. (3), Eq. (4), Eq (11) or Eq (12)
4

fµ (x) = E[f (x + µϵ)],

x ← x − αg
Output: x

evaluations [23]. Among the most widely used techniques is
the forward finite difference technique:
n
X
f (x + µej ) − f (x)
j=1

µ

ej ,

(2)

where ej ∈ Rn represents the j th canonical vector and
where µ > 0 is a scalar. Alternatively, one may use central
finite differences. While this estimate can be very effective, it
requires n + 1 function evaluations, which is a limitation in
high-dimensional settings.
1) Random Coordinate Descent: One way to avoid performing that many function evaluations is Random Coordinate
Descent [24]. As its name suggests, this method alternates
descent steps on random coordinates.
g=

f (x + µej ) − f (x)
ej ,
µ

(3)

where j can be chosen uniformly at random in {1, . . . , n}.
Note that g depends on x. In the convex setting and without
finite-difference approximation (i.e. with the exact gradient),
Random Coordinate Descent requires, on average, at most n
times more steps compared to classical gradient descent [24].
In addition, for a certain class of functions, it can require as
many steps as gradient descent while requiring n times fewer
function evaluations. Thus, this stochastic estimate offers the
hope of matching the gradient’s descent performance with a
few samples. Random Coordinate Descent samples discrete
coordinates, but it is also possible to sample along arbitrary
directions.
2) Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation
(SPSA): In the 1990s, Spall introduced Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation (SPSA) [22]. The main idea
is to replace finite differences with the following stochastic
estimate:
g=

f (x + µ∆) − f (x − µ∆)
∆,
2µ

(4)

where each component of ∆ is equal to ±1 according to
independent Bernoulli distributions. Note that Spall derived
SPSA using central differentiation instead of the forward finite
difference. Under reasonable assumptions, SPSA can achieve
performance similar to that of finite differences while requiring
n times fewer samples [22]. Hence, similarly to Random
Coordinate Descent, this stochastic estimate offers the hope
of matching the gradient’s descent performance with a few
samples.

(5)

where ϵ ∼ N (0, Σ). This is Gaussian smoothing, commonly
referred to as randomized smoothing (RS). As µ approaches
zero, fµ tends to f . As a result, for small values of µ, this
surrogate only slightly changes the objective function (and
therefore the minimum location) but adds smoothness [12].
Importantly, the advantage of this surrogate is that its gradient can be evaluated via an average of function evaluations.
To understand this, let’s first define the constant: κ =
p
(2π)n det(Σ), the normalization factor of the multivariate
Gaussian distribution. With a change of variables (z = x+µϵ),
we can write:
Z
1 ⊤ −1
1
fµ (x) =
f (x + µϵ)e− 2 ϵ Σ ϵ dϵ
κ ϵ
Z
1
− 1 (z−x)⊤ Σ−1 (z−x)
=
f (z)e 2µ2
dz.
(6)
n
κµ z
This allows differentiating fµ without needing the gradient of
the original function, f :
∇fµ (x) =
(7)
Z
⊤ −1
1
1
− 2µ
(z−x)
Σ
(z−x)
2
f (z)e
Σ−1 (z − x)dz.
κµn+2 z
With another change of variable (ϵ = µ−1 (z − x)), we have:
Z
1 ⊤ −1
1
f (x + µϵ)e− 2 ϵ Σ ϵ Σ−1 ϵ dϵ
∇fµ (x) =
κµ ϵ


1
−1
f (x + µϵ)Σ ϵ .
(8)
=E
µ
Hence, the gradient of fµ can be estimated using only
function evaluations of the original function, f . However,
this comes at the cost of approximating an expectation with
samples. Note that the term µ−1 Σ−1 ϵ is the gradient of the
logarithm of the probability density function with respect to
the mean; this is often called the log-likelihood trick. This is
sometimes written:
∇fµ (x) = Ez∼N (x,Σ) [f (z)∇m log(pm=x (z))] ,

(9)

where pm is the density of the Gaussian distribution with
mean m and covariance Σ. This alternative view is useful for
understanding the
explained in Section III-C.
 CMA algorithm,

Lastly, since E f (x)Σ−1 ϵ = 0, we can write:


f (x + µϵ) − f (x) −1
Σ ϵ .
(10)
∇fµ (x) = E
µ
In the general case, the expectation is intractable. The idea is
then to approximate the gradient of the original function with
a stochastic estimate of the gradients of the surrogate. For
instance, one can use the following estimate in Algorithm 3:
g=

f (x + µϵ) − f (x) −1
Σ ϵ.
µ

(11)

4

While µ1 f (x + µϵ)Σ−1 ϵ is a valid gradient estimate, it can be
arbitrarily large. In contrast, the estimate (11) is invariant to
constant translations of the function. Intuitively, this reduces
the variance of the estimate. Note that it is also possible to
use an estimate with central differentiation:
g=

f (x + µϵ) − f (x − µϵ) −1
Σ ϵ.
2µ

(12)

Remark 1. Alternatively, one may sample, ϵ, from the surface
of a unit sphere [25]. This technique guarantees that the norm
of the direction vectors is bounded.
In the convex setting, using the forward estimate (Eq. (11))
or the central estimate (Eq. (12)) as a gradient estimate
requires at most n times more iterations than the standard
gradient method [12].
To summarize, although the assumptions in [12], [22], [24]
vary, the underlying ideas are of the same nature; sampling
along random directions may match the performance of gradient descent while requiring n times fewer function evaluations.
C. Simulated Annealing
So far, we have seen that performing random approximate
gradient descent can be sample efficient in the convex setting.
However, one may ask whether these algorithms can converge
to global solutions in nonconvex settings, as it is the case for
the Greedy Local Search introduced in Algorithm 2. It is well
known that, in its vanilla form, gradient descent is prone to
local minima. However, additive Gaussian noise can lead to
asymptotic global convergence guarantees. To understand why,
we need to study the following Langevin dynamics:
dXt = ∇x log p(Xt ) + dWt .

(13)

Here p is a probability distribution, and Wt is a Brownian
motion. ∇x log p is the score function of the distribution.
Note that the gradient is taken with respect to the input
of p (not with respect to the parameters of p as in the
log-likelihood trick of Gaussian smoothing). This Stochastic
Differential Equation (SDE) has been extensively studied, and
it can be shown that Xt converges to the distribution defined
by p [26]. Consequently, this SDE can be used to sample from
a distribution with probability density p. One way to leverage
this result in the context of global optimization is to choose
the following probability distribution:


1
(14)
p ∝ exp − f ,
λ
where λ > 0 is called the temperature. As λ → 0, the
distribution concentrates on the set of global minima of
f [27]. Furthermore, the score function of this distribution
is proportional to the gradient of f :
1
∇x log p(x) = − ∇x f (x).
λ

(15)

Then, this SDE can be discretized to derive a recursive algorithm. Following this idea, [28] show that with an appropriate

schedule of step sizes αk and γk , the discretized Stochastic
Langevin Gradient Dynamics,
xk+1 = xk − αk gk + γk ϵk ,

(16)

guarantees asymptotic convergence to global solutions. Here,
ϵk is Gaussian noise and gk is of the form (∇f (xk ) + ξk ), with
ξk representing stochastic noise. Hence, gk can be interpreted
as a noisy approximation of the gradient. Intuitively, the
Gaussian noise ϵk helps to escape local minima. The step
sizes αk and γk are chosen such that the corresponding
SDE has a temperature λ that tends slowly to zero. This is
called Simulated Annealing. Intuitively, slowly decreasing the
temperature guides the iterates towards a global solution.
These results can be used to prove the global convergence
of SPSA. More precisely, the iterative scheme in Equation (16)
with g as the SPSA estimate defined in Equation (4) converges
to a global minimum [29]. In fact, in its default version
(i.e. without additive noise), SPSA converges to a global
minimum [29]. This is because the noise of the estimate (i.e.
ξk ) is enough to escape local minima and achieve global
convergence. We are not aware of such results in the context
of randomized smoothing. However, we can conjecture that
similar results may be valid.
To summarize, we have seen that stochasticity can help
gradient descent algorithms reach global solutions. Although
these results are highly relevant theoretically, they have limited
practical impact, as they are only asymptotic.
Remark 2. At first glance, it might be hard to relate the
discretized Langevin update to the Greedy Local Search in
Algorithm 2. However, following the observation from [30],
the if statement ensuring a strict decrease can be related to
the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm [27]. We refer the reader
to Appendix A for more details.
III. T RAJECTORY O PTIMIZATION
In this section, we show how random search allows us
to understand derivative-free optimization algorithms that are
commonly used in robotics. In practice, Trajectory Optimization aims to solve
min

{u0 ,u1 ,...uT −1 }

T
−1
X

ct (xt , ut ) + cT (xT ),

(17)

t=0

such that x0 = x, and xt+1 = fdyn (xt , ut ).
Here x denotes the state, u the control variable, (ct )t the
running cost functions, cT the terminal cost function, T the
time horizon, and fdyn the dynamics. Note that we abuse
the notation by using x to denote the state instead of the
optimization variable. Importantly, the constraints are implicit;
the optimization is performed only with respect to the control
variables. Therefore, this problem is unconstrained and is
referred to as the single shooting approach. Ultimately, it can
be written in the form of Problem (1). The dimension of the
search space is n = T nu , where nu denotes the dimension of
the control inputs.

5

A. Predictive sampling
In robotics, Predictive sampling [9] is one of the simplest
random search approaches. This method can be seen as a
variation of the Greedy Local Search (Algorithm 2). Instead of
sampling one search direction, it samples K search directions
and keeps the best. If no direction provides an improvement,
the previous estimate is kept. Algorithm 4 summarizes the
procedure.

Algorithm 5: Model-Predictive Path Integral (MPPI)
Input: x0 ∈ Rn , Σ, K
1 x ← x0
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample x1:K ∼ N (x, Σ)
// sample
4
Compute weights w1 , . . . wK
K
P
w k xk
// update
5
x←
k=1

Output: x
Algorithm 4: Predictive Sampling
Input: x0 ∈ Rn , K
1 x ← x0
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample d1 , . . . , dK // with independent

gradients of the original function, f . Furthermore, as λ →
∞, fµ,λ → fµ [15]. Consequently, this surrogate can be seen
as a generalization of Gaussian smoothing. The gradient of
the surrogate reads:



−λE exp − λ1 f (x + µϵ) Σ−1 ϵ


.
(21)
∇fµ,λ (x) =
µE exp − λ1 f (x + µϵ)

centered Gaussian distributions

D ← {x}
for k = 1, . . . K do
Add x + dk to D

4
5
6
7

x ← argminx̃∈D f (x̃)
Output: x

In practice, both expectations can be approximated with K
samples ϵ1:K following the distribution N (0, Σ). This leads
to the following estimate:

Importantly, all the function evaluations can be performed
in parallel. While this approach can be quite effective, recent
sampling-based MPC demonstrations typically rely on more
sophisticated algorithms [2], [3].
B. The log-sum-exp transform: MPPI
Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) [10] is a derivativefree TO method initially derived from an information-theoretic
perspective. MPPI iteratively samples around the current
guess and updates it using a weighted exponential average.
More specifically, given a current guess x, MPPI samples
K variables xk following independent Gaussian distributions
centered in x (i.e. xk ∼ N (x, Σ)). Then, it performs an update
according to the following rule:
x←

K
X

wk xk ,

(18)

K
P

g=


exp − λ1 f (x + µϵk ) Σ−1 ϵk

−λ k=1
K
P
µ

j=1

x ← x − αF −1 g,

1
j=1 exp(− λ (f (xj ) − ρ))

K
P

x − αF −1 g = x +
,

(19)

where ρ = minj f (xj ) (to prevent numerical stability issues).
These weights, wk , are called Exponential Average weights.
Algorithm 5 describes the complete procedure.
Let’s see how this update rule can be interpreted as a variation of Gaussian smoothing. Instead of the surrogate function
defined in Equation (5), let’s consider the (continuous) logsum-exp transform function.
 


1
fµ,λ (x) = −λ log E exp − f (x + µϵ)
,
(20)
λ
where ϵ ∼ N (0, Σ) and where λ > 0 is a scalar called the
temperature. As µ goes to zero, we recover f . Therefore, the
gradients of this surrogate can be used to approximate the

(23)

where α is the step size, and where F is the Fisher information
matrix, which is equal to the inverse of the covariance matrix
for Gaussian distributions. The idea of the natural gradient
is to build an update step that is invariant to changes of
variables. More details on the natural gradient are provided
in Appendix A. If α = λ1 , we have

where
wk = PK

(22)



Similarly to the randomized smoothing case, this update
is invariant to additive translation of the function f . Let’s
consider µ = 1. We show that MPPI follows a natural gradient
step [31]:

k=1

exp(− λ1 (f (xk ) − ρ))

.
exp − λ1 f (x + µϵj )


exp − λ1 f (x + µϵk ) ϵk

k=1
K
P

j=1

=

K
X


exp − λ1 f (x + µϵj )

wk (x + ϵk ).

(24)

i=1

As (x + ϵk ) ∼ N (x, Σ), we recover the MPPI update.
2
Furthermore, if Σ = σ 2 I, then σλ ≤ L1 , where L is the
Lipschitz function of the surrogate function [15]. Therefore,
the step size chosen by MPPI can be interpreted as a conservative estimate of the standard optimal step size from convex
optimization [32].
Figure 1 illustrates how the log-sum-exp smoothing differs
from Nesterov’s randomized smoothing. The expectations are
estimated with 100, 000 samples. This simple example function has two types of local minima: one minimum is global

6

but narrow, and the other is non-global but wide. Interestingly,
Gaussian smoothing gives similar importance to both minima;
the two minima now have similar depths and widths. In
contrast, the log-sum-exp smoothing gives more importance
to the global minimum; the global minimum is much wider
and almost absorbs the local one.
1.0

clear how to choose this parameter according to the problem.
In this section, we show how to derive a Covariance Matrix
Adaptation (CMA) scheme. Interestingly, the optimization
of the smooth surrogate function can be interpreted as an
optimization in the space of Gaussian probability distributions.
Indeed, optimizing Equation (5) can be interpreted as a search
over the mean of a Gaussian distribution. More specifically,
we can write:

0.8

fµ (x) = E[f (x + µu)] = Ez∼N (x,Σ) [f (z)] .

Therefore, Gaussian smoothing can be seen as the search for
a Gaussian distribution that minimizes the expectation of f
under that distribution. This distribution can be interpreted as
the belief of where the global minimum of the function f
might be. A natural generalization is to not only optimize the
mean but also the covariance. More specifically, one can apply
gradient descent to the following problem:

f(x)

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Original function
RS Smoothed (μ=0.1)
LSE Smoothed (μ=0.1, λ=0.1)
−1.00

−0.75

−0.50

−0.25

(25)

0.00
x

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

min J(θ),
θ=(x,Σ)

Fig. 1: Randomized smoothing (RS) compared to log-sum-exp
(LSE) smoothing (with Σ = I).

where
J(θ) = Ez∼N (x,Σ) [f (z)] .

To the best of our knowledge, [15] propose the first
explanation of the success of MPPI from an optimization
perspective. [15] shows that the log-sum-exp smoothing can be
interpreted as an interpolation between the default randomized
smoothing and the Moreau envelope. The idea is that the
Moreau envelope is a better approximation than RS but is
harder to compute. MPPI elegantly trades off approximation
quality and computational complexity. At the cost of more
samples, relying on this surrogate can improve convergence
rates [15]. Intuitively, this estimator requires many samples
because of the presence of the expectation in the denominator
in Equation (21). With the progress of parallel computing, this
requirement for multiple samples might not be a limitation
at all. However, using many samples renders the update step
essentially deterministic, which makes the algorithm prone to
getting trapped in local minima.
Remark 3. The log-sum-exp smoothing resembles the riskseeking control formulation [33]. We refer the reader to
Appendix A for a discussion on the topic.
Remark 4. The log-sum-exp smoothing is reminiscent of the
simulated annealing idea. Similarly to simulated annealing, as
the temperature λ approaches 0, the surrogate concentrates
around the global minima. In fact,





1
1
p ∝ exp − fµ,λ = E exp − f (x + µϵ) .
λ
λ
Therefore, applying the Langevin update to the log-sum-exp
surrogate function amounts to applying Gaussian smoothing
1
to the probability distribution proportional to e− λ f .
C. Covariance Matrix Adaptation (CMA)
So far, we have kept the covariance matrix Σ fixed across
various iterations. However, in practice, it is not necessarily

(26)

(27)

J(θ) is minimal when the distribution N (x, Σ) concentrates
around the minima of f [34]. Note that this idea does not
necessarily need to rely on Gaussian distributions. Similarly to
the randomized smoothing case, we can use the log-likelihood
trick:
∇J(θ) = Ez∼N (x,Σ) [f (z)∇θ log(pθ (z))] .

(28)

Here, the gradient of the probability distribution is taken with
respect to both the mean and the covariance. [35] shows
that the natural gradient update, ∆θ = F (θ)−1 ∇J(θ), can be
written:
h
i
⊤
∆Σ = Ez∼N (x,Σ) f (z)((z − x) (z − x) − Σ) ,
∆m = Ez∼N (x,Σ) [f (z)(z − x)] .

(29)

Similarly to the randomized smoothing case, this update step
averages quantities that rely solely on function evaluations
of the original function. Following the natural gradient is
especially relevant in this setting, as it is crucial that the
update does not depend on the choice of parameterization of
the Gaussian distribution. We refer the reader to Appendix A
for more details on the natural gradient. In practice, this update
step can be approximated by samples xk ∼ N (x, Σ). Denoting
wk = f (xk ), the approximate update with a step size α reads
Σ ← (1 − α
x ← (1 − α

K
X
k=1
K
X
k=1

wk )Σ + α

K
X

wk (xk − x)(xk − x)⊤ ,

k=1

wk )x + α

K
X

wk xk .

(30)

k=1

This allows us to recover the CMA scheme (see Algorithm 6).
Note that it is important to update the covariance matrix first,
as the covariance update must rely on the old x (i.e. the
one used to sample). As with Gaussian smoothing, a constant
can be subtracted from f without changing the expectation

7

in Equation (28). Therefore, another choice of weights could
be wk = f (xk ) − f (x), as this renders the update invariant to
translations of f . One could go further and design an algorithm
invariant to any increasing transformation of the objective by
replacing f (xk ) with arbitrary weights wk sorted so that their
order matches that of the function values f (xk ). As pointed out
by [34]–[36], this recovers the CMA-ES algorithm (without
evolution path) [8]. [34] provides a theoretical justification for
this choice of weights.
Algorithm 6: Covariance Matrix Adaptation (CMA)
Input: x0 ∈ Rn , Σ0 , K, α
1 (x, Σ) ← (x0 , Σ0 )
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample x1:K ∼ N (x, Σ)
4
Compute weights w1 , . . . wK
K
P
5
Σ ← (1 − α
wk )Σ
k=1
K
P

+ α
6

wk (xk − x)(xk − x)⊤

k=1
K
P

x ← (1 − α

k=1

wk )x + α

K
P

wk xk

k=1

Output: x
Remark 5. Another choice of weight could be to assign wk =
1
Ke to the best Ke samples and 0 to the others (by best, we
mean samples with the lowest value f (xk )). As pointed out by
[34], this elitist weighting provides an interesting connection
to the well-known Cross-Entropy Method (CEM). We refer the
reader to Appendix A for more details.
An important point that we overlooked is whether the
covariance update rule in Equation (30) maintains the matrix
positive definite. If 0 ≤ η < 1, wi ≥ 0, and the weights sum
to one, then the covariance matrix is always positive definite,
provided that we start with a positive definite matrix [35].
However, in practice, there is no reason that the function f
would be such that the weights satisfy this property.
One possible solution is to design an update that operates on
exponential coordinates so that the covariance matrix naturally
stays positive definite. This is the idea behind xNES [36].
Thanks to the invariant properties of the natural gradient, both
update rules align when the step size approaches zero.
Another approach could be to use the log-sum-exp transformation used for MPPI. Indeed, this transformation naturally
maintains the weights positive and ensures that they sum to
one. We omit the derivations as it is straightforward to show
that applying the natural gradient to Equation (20) yields the
update rule from Equation (30) with the Exponential Average
weights (Equation (19)). We refer to this algorithm as MPPICMA. Table I summarizes all the possible variations of the
CMA algorithm, depending on the choice of weight.
When dealing with TO, it is often preferred to design
algorithms that can achieve linear complexity with respect to
the time horizon T (Equation (17)). This is typically achieved
by exploiting the problem’s structure. One way to do so is
to use a block-diagonal covariance matrix (with T blocks of

MPPI-CMA
CMA-ES⋆
CEM⋆⋆

Weights
Exponential Average (Eq. 19)
Ordering [8]
Elitist (Remark 5)

TABLE I: Variations of Algorithm 6. ⋆ We refer to CMA-ES
without evolutionary path. ⋆⋆ Note that CEM updates the mean
first (see Appendix A).
size nu , where nu is the dimension of the control input), i.e.
Σ = blockdiag(Σ1 , . . . ΣT ). Clearly, this makes the update
rules of Predictive Sampling and MPPI easily implementable
with linear complexity with respect to the time horizon.
However, this is less straightforward in the case of the CMA
update. Specifically, Equation (29) does not necessarily maintain the block-diagonal structure of the covariance matrix. This
is because Σ is not the appropriate representation to work with.
Instead of applying the natural gradient descent to the full
matrix Σ, one can apply it to each block Σt . By construction,
this approach maintains the overall covariance matrix blockdiagonal. Intuitively, the natural gradient update for each block
matches Equation (29). We refer to this approach as blockdiagonal CMA and leave a formal proof of this claim for
future work. Importantly, this formulation allows the CMA
update to be implemented in a sequential way, ensuring linear
computational complexity with respect to the time horizon T .
Remark 6. MPPI with block-diagonal CMA is the same as
PI2 -CMA [13] without temporal averaging.
D. Numerical experiments
We introduce four TO benchmark problems based on Hydrax [37]: Cartpole, DoubleCartPole, PushT, and Humanoid.
Control bounds are enforced with a penalty term in the cost
function. All results are averaged over six seeds. More details
about the cost functions and additional visualizations are
available online 1 .
We compare the performance of Predictive Sampling, randomized smoothing, MPPI, and MPPI-CMA. All algorithms
use 2048 samples per iteration. For MPPI and MPPI-CMA,
we use a temperature of λ = 0.1. For the CMA update, we
use a full covariance as we did not observe that this was
a computational bottleneck. Nevertheless, we provide results
with block-diagonal CMA in Appendix 6. Furthermore, we
find that MPPI-CMA performs significantly better when using
a separate step size for the mean update and the covariance
update. For completeness, results using a shared step size are
provided in Appendix 6.
Figure 2 shows the cost evolution across iterations for
each test problem. The performance of randomized smoothing
varies across test problems and is highly sensitive to the choice
of step size. As expected, MPPI-CMA consistently outperforms MPPI. Interestingly, Predictive Sampling performs well
despite its simplicity.
IV. P OLICY OPTIMIZATION
One of the main limitations of TO is that it is not always
straightforward to use it to derive a controller. Indeed, per1 https://github.com/ajordana/zoo-rob

8

50

200

MPPI
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.1

40

MPPI
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.01

180
160

30

Cost

Cost

140
120
100
80

20

60
40

10

0

20

40

Iteration

60

80

100

0

20

40

(a) Cartpole

Iteration

60

80

100

(b) DoubleCartPole
MPPI
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.01

5

MPPI
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.01

100

80

Cost

Cost

4

3

60

40

2

20

1

0

25

50

75

100

Iteration

125

150

175

200

(c) PushT

0

25

50

75

100

Iteration

125

150

175

200

(d) Humanoid

Fig. 2: Cost according to the number of iterations for different TO test problems. The solid lines represent the median taken
over six seeds.

forming MPC implies solving TO problems online, which can
be extremely challenging due to limited compute time. Even
though recent works were able to achieve impressive zeroorder MPC demonstrations [2], [3], these performances have
not yet matched those obtained by RL [4], [5]. The main
strength of current RL approaches is that they rely solely on
policy evaluation at runtime. All the computations are moved
offline, where the goal is to search for a policy that maximizes
performance across all possible initial conditions. This can be
written:
F (θ) = E [J(θ, s)] ,

(31)

where the expectation is taken over initial states s and where
J(θ, s) is the cost of the trajectory with initial state s and with
the controller πθ :
J(θ, s) =

∞
X

γ k r(sk , ak ),

(32)

k=0

s.t. s0 = s, sk+1 = fdyn (sk , ak ) and ak = πθ (sk ).
θ denotes the parameters of the policy (e.g. the weights
of a neural network). r is the reward, a is the control
action. Note that we follow the RL formalism by trading
the minimization of a cost function for the maximization of
a reward. Furthermore, in contrast to TO, the optimization
for each trajectory is done with an infinite horizon and a
discount factor γ. We do not consider stochastic dynamics

for simplicity, as most robotic models are deterministic (e.g.
locomotion or manipulation). However, the ideas presented in
this section should extend to the stochastic dynamics case.
Because the policy is deterministic, RL algorithms aiming to
solve formulation (31) are called Deterministic Policy Gradient
(DPG) algorithms [38].
Remark 7. The formulation in Equation (31) can easily be
extended to encompass domain randomization by taking the
expectation across multiple parameters of the environment.
Most RL algorithms rely on stochastic policies, therefore
DPG algorithms are often introduced as a special case. While
stochastic policies can be relevant in the context of games or
partially observable settings, most robotic applications, such as
locomotion or manipulation, can be solved with deterministic
policies. In fact, in practice, many works that rely on RL
algorithms derived with stochastic policies generally deploy
a deterministic policy on the robot. Therefore, we chose to
first introduce the deterministic case and then investigate how
stochastic formulations can be understood as a random search
aimed at solving the deterministic case.
There are two main sampling approaches to maximize (31).
The first one is to directly rely on the zero-order techniques,
which implies sampling in the parameter space of a neural
network, similarly to [16], [17]. The second approach, used in
RL, is to leverage the structure of the problem to sample from
the action space. In this work, we are interested in the latter

9

one.
A. Deterministic Policy Gradient
In the deterministic setting, the gradient can be estimated
with the DPG theorem [38]:
∂θ J(θ, s0 ) =

∞
X

γ k ∂θ π(sk )∂a Q(sk , ak ),

(33)

k=0

where the Q-function is defined as
Q(s, a) =

∞
X

γ k r(sk , ak ),

(34)

k=0

s.t. s0 = s, a0 = a, sk+1 = fdyn (sk , ak ), ak = πθ (sk ).
Consequently, we have
"∞
#
X
k
∇θ F (θ) = E
γ ∂θ πθ (sk )∂a Q(sk , ak ) .

(35)

k=0

Note that we follow the formalism of [39] and express
the policy gradient as an expectation over entire trajectories
rather than making the γ-discounted state distribution explicit.
Unfortunately, this formula cannot be directly implemented
in an algorithm because of the presence of the Q-function.
Indeed, the Q-function cannot be computed analytically. One
solution is to estimate it with function approximation at each
gradient descent step. Algorithms relying on this mechanism
are called actor-critics. The actor refers to the policy, while
the critic refers to the Q-function. In practice, the Q-function
is learned in a self-supervised way via the Bellman equation.
There exist many techniques to estimate the critic efficiently
between gradient updates of the actor; we refer the reader to
[11] for a comprehensive treatment of the subject.
Remark 8. A key distinction between TO and policy optimization lies in the objective function: the policy optimization
objective is averaged across various initial conditions. As a
result, the objective cannot be computed analytically and must
instead be estimated through sampling. Consequently, gradient
estimates are inherently noisy and introduce stochasticity into
the optimization process [40]. In light of our discussion on
Langevin dynamics, this inherent stochasticity of RL algorithms could explain their empirical ability to avoid poor local
minima.
B. Gaussian smoothing on the Q-function
DDPG [41] originally proposed to learn the Q-function
with a neural network and directly differentiate it to obtain
∂a Q(sk , ak ). This idea led to state-of-the-art RL algorithms
such as TD3 [42]. In light of the success of randomized
smoothing, a natural idea is to use Gaussian smoothing to estimate the gradient of the Q-function and to use the following
estimate for the gradient of the cost:
"∞
#
X
E
γ k ∂θ πθ (sk )(Q(sk , ak + ϵk ) − Q(sk , ak ))Σ−1 ϵk ,

where the expectation is taken with respect to both the initial
condition and the Gaussian random variables ϵk . This provides
us with a simple variation of actor-critics based on the DPG
theorem. Algorithm (7) summarizes the procedure.
Algorithm 7: Randomized smoothing - Actor-Critic
Input: s0 , θ, Q
1 while stopping criterion is not met do
2
Compute action a = πθ (s)
3
Sample ϵ
4
Update the actor
θ ← θ + α(Q(s, a + ϵ) − Q(s, a))∂θ πθ (s)Σ−1 ϵ
5
Update the critic, Q
Output: θ
We deliberately omit the rollout logic, as well as the
interplay between the actor update and the critic update. This
is because our focus is solely on modifying the actor’s gradient
update in DPG algorithms. We do not aim to provide a
novel actor-critic logic. As shown in the experimental section,
this simple change can lead to competitive algorithms. An
interesting variation of Algorithm 7 is to use the log-sum-exp
transform and use exponential average weights in the actor
update.
Remark 9. One way to understand this algorithm is to
interpret the partial derivative of the policy ∂θ πθ (s) as a
linear mapping from the action space to the policy parameter
space. Consequently, the algorithm can be understood as a
way to map samples from the action space into samples from
the policy parameter space.
C. Numerical experiments
In this section, we investigate the benefits of estimating the
gradient of the Q-function in DPG algorithms such as DDPG
and TD3. Our implementation relies on CleanRL [43] and only
modifies the actor’s update rule. Specifically, we investigate
two smoothing approaches, the default randomized smoothing
(RS) and the one relying on the log-sum-exp (LSE) transform.
Consequently, we benchmark DDPG and TD3 against their
smoothed counterparts: RS-DDPG, LSE-DDPG, RS-TD3, and
LSE-TD3. The performances are evaluated in seven MuJoCo
environments. For the sampling, we use 10 samples per
update, with sampling noise following a Gaussian distribution
with a standard deviation of 0.1 (the covariance matrix is
proportional to the identity matrix). Our implementation is
available online 2 .
Five runs are performed for each test problem. Figure 3
presents the normalized score across all runs. The episodic
return for each environment is provided in Appendix 6. The
results indicate that both RS-DDPG and LSE-DDPG significantly outperform DDPG, which demonstrates the benefits
of smoothing. For TD3, the improvements are not as clear.
This could be explained by the fact that TD3 is already a very
strong algorithm and that the margin for improvement on those

k=0

(36)

2 https://github.com/ajordana/zoo-rob

10

benchmarks is limited. Additionally, our modifications were
restricted to the actor’s update; achieving state-of-the-art performance would most likely require extensive hyperparameter
tuning of the actor-critic mechanism. Nevertheless, the results
show that deterministic policy gradient algorithms can benefit
from smoothing.

Fig. 3: Performance of each RL algorithm.
D. Connection to the Reinforce algorithm
One may ask how the update rule introduced in Equation (36) compares to the classical Reinforce algorithm [11].
First, let’s recall how this algorithm is derived. In its most
general form, Reinforce relies on the gradient of the following
formulation:
#
"∞
X
k
γ rk (Sk , Ak ) ,
(37)
J(θ, s0 ) = E
k=0

s.t. S0 = s0 , Ak ∼ pθ ( . |Sk ), Sk+1 = fdyn (Sk , Ak ).
The policy is no longer a deterministic function but a parameterized distribution over the space of possible actions. Note
that the expectation is taken over random actions. We now
use capitalized letters for actions and states to emphasize their
stochastic nature. The stochastic policy gradient theorem states
that
"∞
#
X
∂
∂
k
J(θ, s0 ) = E
γ Q(Sk , Ak ) log(pθ (Ak |Sk )) .
∂θ
∂θ
k=0

Note that the definition of the Q-function is no longer the same
as in the deterministic case. It is now defined as the expectation
of stochastic rollouts starting at state s with action a. In
practice, in most RL algorithms, the actions are sampled from
a Gaussian probability distribution with mean πθ (s) where πθ
is a neural network. While it is possible to also optimize the
parameters of the covariance, we consider, for simplicity, a
Gaussian distribution with a fixed covariance Σ. Hence, we
have:
a ∼ N (πθ (s), Σ).

(38)

Therefore,
⊤

∂πθ (s)
∂
log(pθ (a|s)) =
Σ−1 (a − πθ (s)).
∂θ
∂θ

(39)

Consequently, we have:
"∞
X
∂
J(θ, s0 ) =E
γ k (Q(Sk , Ak ) − V (Sk ))
∂θ
k=0
#
⊤
∂πθ (Sk )
Σ−1 (Ak − πθ (Sk )) .
∂θ

(40)

The baseline V (Sk ) can be subtracted because the random
variable Ak − πθ (Sk ) has a zero-mean conditioned on the
state. Similarly to the randomized smoothing case, this induces invariance to translation by a constant of the reward
function. Interestingly, we recover a formula very similar to
Equation (36). The only difference is that the rollouts are now
stochastic. This changes two things. The first one is that the
Q-function and the partial derivatives are now evaluated at
Sk (instead of sk in Equation (36)). The second is that the
definition of the Q-function has changed. In Equation (36),
the Q-function denotes deterministic rollouts. In contrast, it is
now an expectation of the outcome of stochastic rollouts.
The additional stochasticity in Equation (40) (as compared
to Equation (36)) can be understood as exploration noise. One
formal justification could be to understand the stochastic policy in Equation (37) as a smoothing operating in action space.
Similarly to Gaussian smoothing, the smoothing allows one to
derive the gradient of the cost with only Q-function evaluation.
Consequently, the policy gradient theorem is analogous to the
log-likelihood trick of Gaussian smoothing.
In the end, Reinforce can be seen as a way to solve the
deterministic formulation introduced in Equation (31) without
the simulator’s gradients by sampling in the action space.
Interestingly, the smoothing of the Reinforce formulation introduces additional stochasticity as compared to Equation (36).
It would be interesting to understand whether this extra
stochasticity, which can be interpreted as exploration noise,
is useful in practice. Intuitively, smoothing helps to simplify
the problem, but adding too much noise might render the
surrogate too different from the initial problem. Future work
could explore connections to other popular stochastic policy
gradient algorithms, such as TRPO or PPO.
V. P OPULATION BASED ALGORITHMS
Theoretically, sampling-based algorithms based on
Langevin dynamics can generate samples from any target
probability distribution [27]. However, when applied to
challenging multimodal distributions, the samples may fail to
mix well and can exhibit strong autocorrelation. A natural
approach to mitigate this issue is to explore algorithms that
consider multiple starting points.
Thus far, all the algorithms that we have considered, either
in TO or RL, have been local search techniques based on the
simple greedy local search from Algorithm 2. It would be
worth deriving algorithms that combine local search concepts
with global ones, in the spirit of Algorithm 1.
The most naive way to combine local and global search is
to perform multiple local searches with diverse initial starting
points. This is also known as Random Restart. Algorithm 8
summarizes the procedure.

11

Algorithm 8: Random Restarts
Input: x0 ∈ Rn
1 x ← x0
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample x̄ in Rn
4
x̃ ← Greedy Local Search(x̄)
5
if f (x̃) < f (x) then
6
x ← x̃
Output: x

A more sophisticated approach is to perform several local
searches in parallel. One way to do this is to maintain a
population of N samples, generate a new population by
applying local search, and then select the N best samples.
This procedure, called (N + λ)-ES, is one of the most
popular Evolutionary Strategy (ES) algorithms. Algorithm 9
summarizes this procedure. Interestingly, there are two special
cases: (1 + 1)-ES is equivalent to Greedy Local Search
(Algorithm 2) and (1 + λ)-ES is equivalent to Predictive
sampling [9] (Algorithm 4).
Algorithm 9: (N + λ)-ES
Input: Initial population of N values: x1 , . . . , xN
1 while Stopping criterion is not met do
2
D ← {x1 , . . . , xN }
3
for i = 1, . . . λ do
4
x ← Sample uniformly from {x1 , . . . , xN }
5
d ← Sample a centered Gaussian
6
Add x + d to D
7

{x1 , . . . , xN } ← the N elements in D with
smallest f (x)
Output: x

A potential limitation of this type of approach is that many
greedy local searches may converge to the same local minimum. Ideally, samples should coordinate with one another. An
intuitive idea is to avoid having particles that are too close to
one another. One way to do so is to perform Stein Variational
Gradient Descent (SVGD) [44]. This formulation naturally
encompasses a repulsion term to maintain a certain distance
between particles. Although SVGD requires gradients, it is
natural to use the concepts covered in the previous Sections
to derive a gradient-free variation. For instance, [45] derive a
gradient-free SVGD based on CMA-ES.
VI. PARALLEL COMPUTING
A common feature of zero-order TO and RL is that both
require numerous function evaluations. To improve computational efficiency, a typical strategy is to parallelize these
evaluations. In the machine learning community, parallel computing is well established with libraries such as JAX [46]
and PyTorch [47]. However, in robotics, these libraries cannot
be used directly, as each function evaluation relies on a

simulator. Indeed, the function evaluation in Equation (17)
or Equation (31) involves propagating the system dynamics
forward in time. For this reason, parallel simulators such as
MuJoCo XLA (MJX) [48] and Isaac Sim [49] have been
developed to support massively parallel rollouts on GPUs,
which makes them especially suitable for sampling-based TO
and RL.
On the algorithmic side, Evosax [50] provides implementations of random search and popular ES algorithms based
on JAX. These can then be used for zero-order MPC with
Hydrax [37]. Finally, CleanRL [43] offers simple and efficient
implementations of widely used RL algorithms.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have demonstrated how random search
provides a unifying perspective on zero-order algorithms commonly used in robotics. We also discussed theoretical concepts
that help explain why sampling-based zero-order techniques
can escape local minima. Leveraging this understanding, we
proposed novel and competitive RL algorithms. These algorithms are only examples of the potential outcomes enabled by
this unified viewpoint. In the future, we hope this tutorial will
help the robotics community tackle open challenges such as
constrained zero-order optimization and the search for global
solutions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank Frederike Dümbgen and Olivier Sigaud
for their constructive feedback, which greatly improved this
paper.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. R. Conn, K. Scheinberg, and L. N. Vicente, Introduction to derivativefree optimization. SIAM, 2009.
[2] A. H. Li, P. Culbertson, V. Kurtz, and A. D. Ames, “Drop: Dexterous
reorientation via online planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14562,
2024.
[3] H. Xue, C. Pan, Z. Yi, G. Qu, and G. Shi, “Full-order sampling-based
MPC for torque-level locomotion control via diffusion-style annealing,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.15610, 2024.
[4] A. Handa, A. Allshire, V. Makoviychuk, A. Petrenko, R. Singh, J. Liu,
D. Makoviichuk, K. Van Wyk, A. Zhurkevich, B. Sundaralingam,
and Y. Narang, “Dextreme: Transfer of agile in-hand manipulation
from simulation to reality,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2023, pp. 5977–5984.
[5] D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, D. Sako, and M. Hutter, “Anymal parkour:
Learning agile navigation for quadrupedal robots,” Science Robotics,
vol. 9, no. 88, p. eadi7566, 2024.
[6] J. Matyas, “Random optimization,” Automation and Remote control,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 246–253, 1965.
[7] H.-P. P. Schwefel, Evolution and optimum seeking: the sixth generation.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1993.
[8] N. Hansen and A. Ostermeier, “Completely derandomized selfadaptation in evolution strategies,” Evolutionary computation, vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 159–195, 2001.
[9] T. Howell, N. Gileadi, S. Tunyasuvunakool, K. Zakka, T. Erez, and
Y. Tassa, “Predictive sampling: Real-time behaviour synthesis with
mujoco,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00541, 2022.
[10] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou,
“Aggressive driving with model predictive path integral control,” in
2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1433–1440.
[11] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA, USA: A Bradford Book, 2018.

12

[12] Y. Nesterov and V. Spokoiny, “Random gradient-free minimization of
convex functions,” Foundations of Computational Mathematics, vol. 17,
no. 2, pp. 527–566, 2017.
[13] F. Stulp and O. Sigaud, “Path integral policy improvement with covariance matrix adaptation,” in Proceedings of the 29th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-12), ser. ICML ’12, J. Langford and J. Pineau, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Omnipress, July 2012,
pp. 281–288.
[14] N. Wagener, C. Cheng, J. Sacks, and B. Boots, “An online learning
approach to model predictive control,” in Robotics: Science and
Systems XV, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany,
June 22-26, 2019, A. Bicchi, H. Kress-Gazit, and S. Hutchinson, Eds.,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.15607/RSS.2019.XV.033
[15] K. Scaman, L. Dos Santos, M. Barlier, and I. Colin, “A simple and efficient smoothing method for faster optimization and local exploration,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 6503–
6513, 2020.
[16] T. Salimans, J. Ho, X. Chen, S. Sidor, and I. Sutskever, “Evolution
strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
[17] H. Mania, A. Guy, and B. Recht, “Simple random search of static linear
policies is competitive for reinforcement learning,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.
[18] H. J. T. Suh, T. Pang, and R. Tedrake, “Bundled gradients through
contact via randomized smoothing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 4000–4007, 2022.
[19] Q. Le Lidec, F. Schramm, L. Montaut, C. Schmid, I. Laptev, and
J. Carpentier, “Leveraging randomized smoothing for optimal control
of nonsmooth dynamical systems,” Nonlinear Analysis: Hybrid Systems,
vol. 52, p. 101468, 2024.
[20] O. Sigaud and F. Stulp, “Policy search in continuous action domains:
an overview,” Neural Networks, vol. 113, pp. 28–40, 2019.
[21] O. Sigaud, “Combining evolution and deep reinforcement learning for
policy search: A survey,” ACM Transactions on Evolutionary Learning,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1–20, 2023.
[22] J. C. Spall, Introduction to stochastic search and optimization: estimation, simulation, and control. John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
[23] A. S. Berahas, L. Cao, K. Choromanski, and K. Scheinberg, “A theoretical and empirical comparison of gradient approximations in derivativefree optimization,” Foundations of Computational Mathematics, vol. 22,
no. 2, pp. 507–560, 2022.
[24] S. J. Wright, “Coordinate descent algorithms,” Mathematical programming, vol. 151, no. 1, pp. 3–34, 2015.
[25] A. D. Flaxman, A. T. Kalai, and H. B. McMahan, “Online convex
optimization in the bandit setting: gradient descent without a gradient,”
arXiv preprint cs/0408007, 2004.
[26] G. O. Roberts and R. L. Tweedie, “Exponential convergence of Langevin
distributions and their discrete approximations,” Bernoulli, vol. 2, no. 4,
pp. 341 – 363, 1996.
[27] C. Andrieu, N. De Freitas, A. Doucet, and M. I. Jordan, “An introduction
to MCMC for machine learning,” Machine learning, vol. 50, pp. 5–43,
2003.
[28] S. B. Gelfand and S. K. Mitter, “Recursive stochastic algorithms for
global optimization in Rd ,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization,
vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 999–1018, 1991.
[29] J. L. Maryak and D. C. Chin, “Global random optimization by simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation,” in Proceedings of the 2001
American control conference.(Cat. No. 01CH37148), vol. 2. IEEE,
2001, pp. 756–762.
[30] M. Toussaint, C. V. Braun, and J. Ortiz-Haro, “NLP sampling: Combining MCMC and NLP methods for diverse constrained sampling,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.03035, 2024.
[31] S.-I. Amari, “Natural gradient works efficiently in learning,” Neural
computation, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 251–276, 1998.
[32] Y. Nesterov, Lectures on convex optimization. Springer, 2018, vol. 137.
[33] P. Whittle, “Risk-sensitive linear/quadratic/gaussian control,” Advances
in Applied Probability, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 764–777, 1981.
[34] Y. Ollivier, L. Arnold, A. Auger, and N. Hansen, “Information-geometric
optimization algorithms: A unifying picture via invariance principles,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 18, no. 18, pp. 1–65, 2017.
[35] Y. Akimoto, Y. Nagata, I. Ono, and S. Kobayashi, “Bidirectional relation
between cma evolution strategies and natural evolution strategies,” in
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, PPSN XI: 11th International
Conference, Kraków, Poland, September 11-15, 2010, Proceedings, Part
I 11. Springer, 2010, pp. 154–163.

[36] D. Wierstra, T. Schaul, T. Glasmachers, Y. Sun, J. Peters, and J. Schmidhuber, “Natural evolution strategies,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 949–980, 2014.
[37] V. Kurtz, “Hydrax: Sampling-based model predictive control on gpu
with jax and mujoco mjx,” 2024, https://github.com/vincekurtz/hydrax.
[38] D. Silver, G. Lever, N. Heess, T. Degris, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller,
“Deterministic policy gradient algorithms,” in International conference
on machine learning. Pmlr, 2014, pp. 387–395.
[39] C. Nota and P. S. Thomas, “Is the policy gradient a gradient?” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.07073, 2019.
[40] S. Mandt, M. D. Hoffman, and D. M. Blei, “Stochastic gradient descent as approximate bayesian inference,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 18, no. 134, pp. 1–35, 2017.
[41] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa,
D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
[42] S. Fujimoto, H. Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods,” in International conference on
machine learning. PMLR, 2018, pp. 1587–1596.
[43] S. Huang, R. F. J. Dossa, C. Ye, J. Braga, D. Chakraborty, K. Mehta,
and J. G. Araújo, “Cleanrl: High-quality single-file implementations of
deep reinforcement learning algorithms,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 23, no. 274, pp. 1–18, 2022. [Online]. Available:
http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-1342.html
[44] Q. Liu and D. Wang, “Stein variational gradient descent: A general
purpose bayesian inference algorithm,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 29, 2016.
[45] C. V. Braun, R. T. Lange, and M. Toussaint, “Stein variational evolution
strategies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10390, 2024.
[46] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson,
C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas,
S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang, “JAX: composable
transformations of Python+NumPy programs,” 2018. [Online].
Available: http://github.com/jax-ml/jax
[47] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf,
E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch: An imperative style, highperformance deep learning library,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[48] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “Mujoco: A physics engine for
model-based control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE, 2012, pp. 5026–5033.
[49] NVIDIA, “Isaac Sim,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
isaac-sim/IsaacSim
[50] R. T. Lange, “evosax: Jax-based evolution strategies,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.04180, 2022.
[51] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical optimization. Springer, 1999.

A PPENDIX
[30] shows how the Metropolis adjusted Langevin algorithm can be interpreted as a line search with the Armijo condition. Similarly, in the trivial case where the step size αk = 0
in Equation (16), we can recover a connection to Algorithm 2.
The idea of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm [27] is to accept
a step from x to x′ with probability:


p(x′ ) q(x|x′ )
min 1,
.
(41)
p(x) q(x′ |x)
If αk = 0 in Equation (16), then,
q(·|x) ∝ N (x, γ 2 I).

(42)

Given Equation (14), the acceptance probability of the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm [27] is




p(x′ ) q(x|x′ )
−(f (x′ )−f (x))
min 1,
=
min
1,
e
.
p(x) q(x′ |x)
′

Interestingly, e−(f (x )−f (x)) > 1 implies f (x′ ) < f (x).
Hence, one could easily transform the Greedy Local Search

13

(Algorithm 2) into an MCMC method with the MetropolisHastings algorithm [27]. Indeed, in Algorithm 2, we could
accept the step x′ = x + d with a probability of one in the
case of a decrease and allow for an increase with a probability
′
of e−(f (x )−f (x)) .
The idea of the natural gradient [31] is to find the steepest
descent according to an arbitrary metric d. More precisely, the
natural gradient looks for a small step h satisfying:
minf (x) + ∇f (x)T h,
h

(43)

2

s.t. d(x + h, x) = ϵ .

1
(x2 − x1 )T A(x2 − x1 ).
2

(44)

(45)

(47)

(48)

In the context where θ characterizes a probability distribution,
a typical choice of distance is:


Z
pθ+h (x)
KL(pθ+h ||pθ ) =
pθ+h (x) log
dx.
(49)
pθ (x)
x
Locally, we can show that this metric is quadratic. Let’s look
at the partial derivatives of Equation (49) with respect to h:


Z
pθ+h (x)
∂ KL(pθ+h ||pθ )
=
∂h pθ+h (x) log
dx.
∂h
pθ (x)
x
R
R
As x pθ+h (x)dx = 1 implies ∂h x pθ+h (x)dx = 0 for all h.
Hence,
∂ KL(pθ+h ||pθ )
(h = 0) = 0.
∂h

where F (θ) is the Fisher matrix. In the end,
1 T
h F (θ)h + o(||h||2 ).
2
Let’s consider the specific case where θ = m and:


1
1
pθ (x) = exp − (x − m)T Σ−1 (x − m) .
κ
2

(53)

Therefore, the Fisher matrix reads:


F (θ) = E Σ−1 (x − θ)(x − θ)T Σ−1


= Σ−1 E (x − θ)(x − θ)T Σ−1

(54)

(55)

(46)

Hence, the natural gradient step is of the form:
h ∝ −A−1 ∇f (x).

∂θ log(pθ (x))T ∂θ log(pθ (x))pθ (x)dx
x


= EX∼pθ ∂θ log(pθ (X))T ∂θ log(pθ (X)) = F (θ),
=

= Σ−1 .

The sign of λ can be recovered with the second order optimality condition [51]:
∇2hh L(h, λ) ⪰ 0 =⇒ −λA ⪰ 0 =⇒ λ ≤ 0.

Zx

1
dx
pθ (x)

∂θ log(pθ (x)) = (x − θ)T Σ−1 .

We have:
∇h L(h, λ) = 0 ⇐⇒ ∇f (x) − λAh = 0
1
⇐⇒ h = A−1 ∇f (x).
λ

∂h pθ (x)T ∂h pθ (x)

=

(52)

We have

Let’s write the Lagrangian of the problem (43)
1
L(h, λ) = f (x) + ∇f (x)T h − λ( hT Ah − ϵ2 ).
2

∂ 2 KL(pθ+h ||pθ )
(h = 0)
2
Z ∂ h

KL(pθ+h ||pθ ) =

where ϵ is a small scalar. Typically, d is such that (at least
locally):
d(x1 , x2 ) =

And we find that:

(50)

Then, we can compute the Hessian with respect to h:


Z
∂ 2 KL(pθ+h ||pθ )
pθ+h (x)
2
=
∂
p
(x)
log
dx
h θ+h
∂2h
pθ (x)
x
Z
1
+ ∂h pθ+h (x)T ∂h pθ+h (x)
dx.
(51)
p
θ+h (x)
x

Hence, in that case, the Fisher matrix is equal to the inverse
of the covariance matrix. The case where θ = (m, Σ) can be
found in [35].
Interestingly, the surrogate defined in Equation (20) resembles the risk-seeking control formulation [33]. At first, this
may seem counter-intuitive, as in practice, we prefer designing
risk-averse controllers rather than risk-seeking ones. However,
from an optimization perspective, the risk-seeking formulation
has the advantage of giving more importance to lower values.
Figure 4 illustrates the landscape for each formulation. The
risk-neutral formulation corresponds to the default randomized
smoothing. One way to interpret these landscapes is to see the
smoothing noise as a disturbance from the environment. On
one hand, the risk-seeking formulation expects the noise to act
in its favor by shifting the state towards the global solution.
Therefore, it lowers the function value in the vicinity of the
narrow global minima. On the other hand, the risk-averse
formulation expects the noise to be adversarial. Therefore,
it increases the function value (as compared to the neutral
formulation) around the narrow global minima.
The Cross Entropy Method (CEM) is a popular algorithm
that can be used for optimization. Algorithm 10 summarizes
the main steps of CEM. Interestingly, this algorithm connects
to the natural gradient [34]. Indeed, in Equation (30), one can
assign wk = K1e to the best Ke samples and 0 to the others (by
best, we mean samples with the lowest value f (xk )). Choosing
a step-size α = 1 yields an algorithm close to the well-known
Cross-Entropy Method (CEM). The only difference with the
original CEM is that the natural gradient update computes the
covariance update using the old x (i.e. the one used to sample)
instead of the new one [34].

14

1.0

0.8

f(x)

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Original function
risk neutral
Risk seeking
Risk averse
−1.00

−0.75

−0.50

−0.25

0.00
x

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

Fig. 4: Risk-seeking and Risk-averse transformation
Algorithm 10: Cross-Entropy Method (CEM)
Input: x0 ∈ X , Σ0 , Ke
1 (x, Σ) ← (x0 , Σ0 )
2 while stopping criterion is not met do
3
Sample x1:K ∼ N (x, Σ)
// sample
4
Sort x1:K such that f (x1 ) ≤ f (x2 ) ≤ · · · ≤ f (xK )
// Rank
5

6

x←

K
Pe

Σ←

k=1
K
Pe
k=1

1
Ke xk
1
Ke (xk

// update

− x)(xk − x)⊤

// update

Output: x

Figure 2 provides additional results for the TO benchmark.
Specifically, we show how block-diagonal CMA compares to
the default CMA (which relies on the full matrix). In addition,
we illustrate the advantage of having different step-sizes for
the mean and the covariance.
Figure 6 presents an alternative metric summarizing the
RL results across tasks (instead of runs). Figure 7 shows the
episodic return for each test environment.

15

MPPI
MPPI lr=0.1
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA lr=(0.1, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(0.1, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.1
CMA-ES

Cost

40

30

200

MPPI
MPPI lr=0.1
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA lr=(0.1, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(0.1, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.01
CMA-ES

180
160
140

Cost

50

120
100
80

20

60
40

10

0

20

40

Iteration

60

80

100

0

20

40

(a) Cartpole

80

100

3

MPPI
MPPI lr=0.1
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA lr=(0.1, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(0.1, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.01
CMA-ES

140

120

100

Cost

Cost

4

60

(b) DoubleCartPole
MPPI
MPPI lr=0.1
MPPI-CMA lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA lr=(0.1, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(1.0, 0.1)
MPPI-CMA Block Diagonal lr=(0.1, 0.1)
Predictive Sampling
Randomized Smoothing lr=0.01
CMA-ES

5

Iteration

80

60
2

40

20

1

0
0

25

50

75

100

Iteration

(c) PushT

125

150

175

200

0

25

50

75

100

Iteration

125

150

175

200

(d) Humanoid

Fig. 5: Cost according to the number of iterations for different test problems. The solid line represents the median taken over
6 seeds.

Fig. 6: Performance of each RL algorithm. The metric is evaluated per task.

16

Fig. 7: Episodic return for each environment

