2 3 4 5 6 7Travel

8 9 10Costs

11 12 13 14 15

1 220

3 4 15 26 37 48 59 6107 11

!

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 141 15

14 25 36 47 58 69 7108 11

9 10

2 320

12 11

13 12

14 13

15 14

20 15 20

Figure 1.3.2 Example of a DP formulation of the traveling salesman problem.

The travel times between the four cities A, B, C, and D are shown in the matrix at the bottom. We form a graph whose nodes are the k-city sequences and correspond to the states of the kth stage. The transition costs/travel times are shown next to the arcs. The optimal costs-to-go are generated by DP starting from the terminal state and going backwards towards the initial state, and are shown next to the nodes. There are two optimal sequences here (ABDCA and ACDBA), and they are marked with thick lines. Both optimal sequences can be obtained by forward minimization [cf. Eq. (1.7)], starting from the initial state x0 .

1.3.2

Discrete Deterministic Optimization

Discrete optimization problems can be formulated as DP problems by breaking down each feasible solution into a sequence of decisions/controls;

as illustrated by the scheduling Example 1.1.1. This formulation will often lead to an intractable DP computation because of an exponential explosion of the number of states. However, it brings to bear approximate DP methods, such as rollout and others that we will discuss in future chapters. We illustrate the reformulation by means of an example and then we generalize.

Example 1.3.1 (The Traveling Salesman Problem)

An important model for scheduling a sequence of operations is the classical traveling salesman problem. Here we are given N cities and the travel time between each pair of cities. We wish to find a minimum time travel that visits each of the cities exactly once and returns to the start city. To convert this problem to a DP problem, we form a graph whose nodes are the sequences of k distinct cities, where k = 1, . . . , N . The k-city sequences correspond to the states of the kth stage. The initial state x0 consists of some city, taken as the start (city A in the example of Fig. 1.3.2). A k-city node/state leads to a (k + 1)-city node/state by adding a new city at a cost equal to the travel time between the last two of the k + 1 cities; see Fig. 1.3.2. Each sequence of

N cities is connected to an artificial terminal node t with an arc of cost equal to the travel time from the last city of the sequence to the starting city, thus completing the transformation to a DP problem.

The optimal costs-to-go from each node to the terminal state can be obtained by the DP algorithm and are shown next to the nodes. Note, however, that the number of nodes grows exponentially with the number of cities

N . This makes the DP solution intractable for large N . As a result, large traveling salesman and related scheduling problems are typically addressed with approximation methods, some of which are based on DP, and will be discussed as part of our subsequent development.

Let us now extend the ideas of the preceding example to the general discrete optimization problem:

minimize G(u)

subject to u ∈ U, where U is a finite set of feasible solutions and G(u) is a cost function.

We assume that each solution u has N components; i.e., it has the form u = (u1 , . . . , uN ), where N is a positive integer. We can then view the problem as a sequential decision problem, where the components u1 , . . . , uN are selected one-at-a-time. A k-tuple (u1 , . . . , uk ) consisting of the first k components of a solution is called an k-solution. We associate k-solutions with the kth stage of the finite horizon DP problem shown in Fig. 1.3.3.

In particular, for k = 1, . . . , N , we view as the states of the kth stage all the k-tuples (u1 , . . . , uk ). The initial state is an artificial state denoted s.

From this state we may move to any state (u1 ), with u1 belonging to the set



U1 = ũ1 | there exists a solution of the form (ũ1 , ũ2 , . . . , ũN ) ∈ U .

Thus U1 is the set of choices of u1 that are consistent with feasibility.

More generally, from a state (u1 , . . . , uk ), we may move to any state of the form (u1 , . . . , uk , uk+1 ), with uk+1 belonging to the set



Uk+1 (u1 , . . . , uk ) = ũk+1 | there exists a solution of the form

(u1 , . . . , uk , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN ) ∈ U .

Sec. 1.3

Examples, Variations, and Simplifications

Stage3 1Stage

Stage 2 Stage

Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage

. . . i 3 Stage N

Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage

Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage

Artificial Start State End. State ..

Initial State 15 1.. 5 18 4 19

) .. 9 21 25) 8. 12 13

).

s t u

.

.

) ..

.

) ..

) ..

... i

Artificial Start State End State

..

Artificial Start) .State End State

... i

... i

s t u

.

) ..

Cost G(u)

Set of States (

Set (of( States (

Set of States (u1 )Set

SetofofStates

States

Set of States (

(

1 , u2 ) Set

) Set of(uStates

(u1 ,of u2States

, u3Set

) Set

,). Set

. . , uof )States of States u = (u1 , . . . , uN )

Figure 1.3.3. Formulation of a discrete optimization problem as a DP problem with N + 1 stages. There is a cost G(u) only at the terminal stage on the arc connecting an N -solution u = (u1 , . . . , uN ) to the artificial terminal state. Alternative formulations may use fewer states by taking advantage of the problem’s structure.

At state (u1 , . . . , uk ) we must choose uk+1 from the set Uk+1 (u1 , . . . , uk ).

These are the choices of uk+1 that are consistent with the preceding choices u1 , . . . , uk , and are also consistent with feasibility. The terminal states correspond to the N -solutions u = (u1 , . . . , uN ), and the only nonzero cost is the terminal cost G(u). This terminal cost is incurred upon transition from u to an artificial end state; see Fig. 1.3.3.

Let Jk* (u1 , . . . , uk ) denote the optimal cost starting from the k-solution

(u1 , . . . , uk ), i.e., the optimal cost of the problem over solutions whose first k components are constrained to be equal to ui , i = 1, . . . , k, respectively.

The DP algorithm is described by the equation

Jk* (u1 , . . . , uk ) =

min

uk+1 ∈Uk+1 (u1 ,...,uk )

* (u , . . . , u , u

Jk+1 k k+1 ),

(1.14)

with the terminal condition

* (u , . . . , u ) = G(u , . . . , u ).

JN

N

N

The algorithm (1.14) executes backwards in time: starting with the known

* = G, we compute J *

* function JN

N −1 , then JN −2 , and so on up to computing

*

∗

∗

J1 . An optimal solution (u1 , . . . , uN ) is then constructed by going forward through the algorithm u∗k+1 ∈ arg

min

uk+1 ∈Uk+1 (u∗

,...,u∗

)

k

* (u∗ , . . . , u∗ , u

Jk+1 k+1 ), k

k = 0, . . . , N − 1,

(1.15)

first compute u∗1 , then u∗2 , and so on up to u∗N ; cf. Eq. (1.7).

Of course here the number of states typically grows exponentially with

N , but we can use the DP minimization (1.15) as a starting point for the use of approximation methods. For example we may try to use approximation

* in value space, whereby we replace Jk+1 with some suboptimal J˜k+1 in Eq.

(1.15). One possibility is to use as

J˜k+1 (u∗1 , . . . , u∗k , uk+1 ), the cost generated by a heuristic method that solves the problem suboptimally with the values of the first k + 1 decision components fixed at u∗1 , . . . , u∗k , uk+1 . This is called a rollout algorithm, and it is a very simple and effective approach for approximate combinatorial optimization. It will be discussed later in this book, in Chapter 2 for finite horizon stochastic problems, and in Chapter 4 for infinite horizon problems, where it will be related to the method of policy iteration.

Finally, let us mention that shortest path and discrete optimization problems with a sequential character can be addressed by a variety of approximate shortest path methods. These include the so called label correcting, A∗ , and branch and bound methods for which extensive accounts can be found in the literature [the author’s DP textbook [Ber17] (Chapter

2) contains a substantial account, which connects with the material of this section].

1.3.3

Problems with a Terminal State

Many DP problems of interest involve a terminal state, i.e., a state t that is cost-free and absorbing in the sense that gk (t, uk , wk ) = 0,

fk (t, uk , wk ) = t,

for all uk ∈ Uk (t), k = 0, 1, . . . .

Thus the control process essentially terminates upon reaching t, even if this happens before the end of the horizon. One may reach t by choice if a special stopping decision is available, or by means of a transition from another state.

Generally, when it is known that an optimal policy will reach the terminal state within at most some given number of stages N , the DP problem can be formulated as an N -stage horizon problem.† The reason is that even if the terminal state t is reached at a time k < N , we can extend our stay at t for an additional N − k stages at no additional cost.

An example is the deterministic shortest path problem that we discussed in Section 1.3.1.

† When an upper bound on the number of stages to termination is not known, the problem must be formulated as an infinite horizon problem, as will be discussed in a subsequent chapter.

Sec. 1.3

Examples, Variations, and Simplifications

Discrete deterministic optimization problems generally have a close connection to shortest path problems as we have seen in Section 1.3.2. In the problem discussed in that section, the terminal state is reached after exactly N stages (cf. Fig. 1.3.3), but in other problems it is possible that termination can happen earlier. The following well known puzzle is an example.

Example 1.3.2 (The Four Queens Problem)

Four queens must be placed on a 4 × 4 portion of a chessboard so that no queen can attack another. In other words, the placement must be such that every row, column, or diagonal of the 4 × 4 board contains at most one queen.

Equivalently, we can view the problem as a sequence of problems; first, placing a queen in one of the first two squares in the top row, then placing another queen in the second row so that it is not attacked by the first, and similarly placing the third and fourth queens. (It is sufficient to consider only the first two squares of the top row, since the other two squares lead to symmetric positions; this is an example of a situation where we have a choice between several possible state spaces, but we select the one that is smallest.)

We can associate positions with nodes of an acyclic graph where the root node s corresponds to the position with no queens and the terminal nodes correspond to the positions where no additional queens can be placed without some queen attacking another. Let us connect each terminal position with an artificial terminal node t by means of an arc. Let us also assign to all arcs cost zero except for the artificial arcs connecting terminal positions with less than four queens with the artificial node t. These latter arcs are assigned a cost of 1 (see Fig. 1.3.4) to express the fact that they correspond to dead-end positions that cannot lead to a solution. Then, the four queens problem reduces to finding a minimal cost path from node s to node t, with an optimal sequence of queen placements corresponding to cost 0.

Note that once the states/nodes of the graph are enumerated, the problem is essentially solved. In this 4 × 4 problem the states are few and can be easily enumerated. However, we can think of similar problems with much larger state spaces. For example consider the problem of placing N queens on an N × N board without any queen attacking another. Even for moderate values of N , the state space for this problem can be extremely large (for

N = 8 the number of possible placements with exactly one queen in each row is 88 = 16, 777, 216). It can be shown that there exist solutions to this problem for all N ≥ 4 (for N = 2 and N = 3, clearly there is no solution).

There are also several variants of the N queens problem. For example finding the minimal number of queens that can be placed on an N × N board so that they either occupy or attack every square; this is known as the queen domination problem. The minimal number can be found in principle by DP, and it is known for some N (for example the minimal number is 5 for N = 8), but not for all N (see e.g., the paper by Fernau [Fe10]).

Starting Position ˆ

Root Node s

Length = 0 Dead-End Position Solution

Length = 0 Dead-End Position Solution

t Length = 1

t Length = 1

Length = 0 Dead-End Position Solution Starting

Artificial Terminal Node

Artificial Terminal Node

Artificial Terminal Node t

Figure 1.3.4 Discrete optimization formulation of the four queens problem.

Symmetric positions resulting from placing a queen in one of the rightmost squares in the top row have been ignored. Squares containing a queen have been darkened. All arcs have length zero except for those connecting dead-end positions to the artificial terminal node.

1.3.4

Forecasts

Consider a situation where at time k the controller has access to a forecast yk that results in a reassessment of the probability distribution of wk and possibly of future disturbances. For example, yk may be an exact prediction of wk or an exact prediction that the probability distribution of wk is a

Sec. 1.3

Examples, Variations, and Simplifications

specific one out of a finite collection of distributions. Forecasts of interest in practice are, for example, probabilistic predictions on the state of the weather, the interest rate for money, and the demand for inventory.

Generally, forecasts can be handled by introducing additional states corresponding to the information that the forecasts provide. We will illustrate the process with a simple example.

Assume that at the beginning of each stage k, the controller receives an accurate prediction that the next disturbance wk will be selected according to a particular probability distribution out of a given collection of distributions {P1 , . . . , Pm }; i.e., if the forecast is i, then wk is selected according to Pi . The a priori probability that the forecast will be i is denoted by pi and is given.

The forecasting process can be represented by means of the equation yk+1 = ξk , where yk+1 can take the values 1, . . . , m, corresponding to the m possible forecasts, and ξk is a random variable taking the value i with probability pi . The interpretation here is that when ξk takes the value i, then wk+1 will occur according to the distribution Pi .

By combining the system equation with the forecast equation yk+1 = ξk , we obtain an augmented system given by



xk+1 yk+1



=



fk (xk , uk , wk )

ξk



.

The new state is x̃k = (xk , yk ).

The new disturbance is w̃k = (wk , ξk ), and its probability distribution is determined by the distributions Pi and the probabilities pi , and depends explicitly on x̃k (via yk ) but not on the prior disturbances.

Thus, by suitable reformulation of the cost, the problem can be cast as a stochastic DP problem. Note that the control applied depends on both the current state and the current forecast. The DP algorithm takes the form

* (x , y ) = g (x ),

JN

N

N

N

N n

Jk* (xk , yk ) = min

E gk (xk , uk , wk )

uk ∈Uk (xk ) wk

+

m

X i=1

* pi Jk+1 fk (xk , uk , wk ), i



o (1.16)

yk ,

Garage n 0 10 1 0 1 2

nitial State 15 1 5 18 4 19 9 21 25 8 12 13 c(0)

C c(1)

j

N N

· · · Stage

· ·N

· N3−Stage k k + 21j Stage

1) k k1 Stage

) c(k + 1)

(0) c(k)

+ 1) c(N − 1) Parked

)C c

1) Parking Spaces

Termination State

Figure 1.3.5 Cost structure of the parking problem. The driver may park at space k = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1 at cost c(k), if the space is free, or continue to the next space k + 1 at no cost. At space N (the garage) the driver must park at cost C.

where yk may take the values 1, . . . , m, and the expectation over wk is taken with respect to the distribution Pyk .

It should be clear that the preceding formulation admits several extensions. One example is the case where forecasts can be influenced by the control action (e.g., pay extra for a more accurate forecast) and involve several future disturbances. However, the price for these extensions is increased complexity of the corresponding DP algorithm.

1.3.5

Problems with Uncontrollable State Components

In many problems of interest the natural state of the problem consists of several components, some of which cannot be affected by the choice of control. In such cases the DP algorithm can be simplified considerably, and be executed over the controllable components of the state. Before describing how this can be done in generality, let us consider an example.

Example 1.3.3 (Parking)

A driver is looking for inexpensive parking on the way to his destination. The parking area contains N spaces, and a garage at the end. The driver starts at space 0 and traverses the parking spaces sequentially, i.e., from space k he goes next to space k + 1, etc. Each parking space k costs c(k) and is free with probability p(k) independently of whether other parking spaces are free or not. If the driver reaches the last parking space and does not park there, he must park at the garage, which costs C. The driver can observe whether a parking space is free only when he reaches it, and then, if it is free, he makes a decision to park in that space or not to park and check the next space. The problem is to find the minimum expected cost parking policy.

We formulate the problem as a DP problem with N stages, corresponding to the parking spaces, and an artificial terminal state t that corresponds to having parked; see Fig. 1.3.5. At each stage k = 0, . . . , N − 1, in addition to t, we have two states (k, F ) and (k, F ), corresponding to space k being free or taken, respectively. The decision/control is to park or continue at state

(k, F ) [there is no choice at states (k, F ) and the garage].

Sec. 1.3

Examples, Variations, and Simplifications

Let us now derive the form of DP algorithm, denoting

Jk∗ (F ): The optimal cost-to-go upon arrival at a space k that is free.

Jk∗ (F ): The optimal cost-to-go upon arrival at a space k that is taken.

∗

JN

(t) = C: The cost-to-go upon arrival at the garage.

Jk∗ (t) = 0: The terminal cost-to-go.

The DP algorithm for k = 0, . . . , N − 1 takes the form

Jk∗ (F )

=







∗

∗ min c(k), p(k + 1)Jk+1

(F ) + 1 − p(k + 1) Jk+1

(F )



 min c(N − 1), C

Jk∗ (F )

=





∗

∗ p(k + 1)Jk+1

(F ) + 1 − p(k + 1) Jk+1

(F )

C



if k < N − 1, if k = N − 1,

if k < N − 1, if k = N − 1,

(we omit here the obvious equations for the terminal state t and the garage state N ).

While this algorithm is easily executed, it can be written in a simpler and equivalent form, which takes advantage of the fact that the second component (F or F ) of the state is uncontrollable. This can be done by introducing the scalars

Jˆk = p(k)Jk∗ (F ) + 1 − p(k) Jk∗ (F ),



k = 0, . . . , N − 1,

which can be viewed as the optimal expected cost-to-go upon arriving at space k but before verifying its free or taken status.

Indeed, from the preceding DP algorithm, we have

JˆN−1 = p(N − 1) min c(N − 1), C + 1 − p(N − 1) C,





Jˆk = p(k) min c(k), Jˆk+1 + 1 − p(k) Jˆk+1 ,









k = 0, . . . , N − 2.

From this algorithm we can also obtain the optimal parking policy, which is to park at space k = 0, . . . , N − 1 if it is free and c(k) ≤ Jˆk+1 .

Figure 1.3.6 provides a plot for Jˆk for the case where p(k) ≡ 0.05,

c(k) = N − k,

C = 100,

N = 200.

(1.17)

The optimal policy is to travel to space 165 and then to park at the first available space. The reader may verify that this type of policy, characterized by a single threshold distance, is optimal assuming that c(k) is monotonically decreasing with k.

We will now formalize the procedure illustrated in the preceding example. Let the state of the system be a composite (xk , yk ) of two components xk and yk . The evolution of the main component, xk , is affected by the control uk according to the equation xk+1 = fk (xk , yk , uk , wk ),

./,+0123()2+7831-934)*,

#!!

:"

200 150 100 150 200

$
