p. 37

. .

p. 40 p. 42

In this chapter, we provide some background on exact dynamic programming (DP for short), with a view towards the suboptimal solution methods that are the main subject of this book. These methods are known by several essentially equivalent names: reinforcement learning, approximate dynamic programming, and neuro-dynamic programming. In this book, we will use primarily the most popular name: reinforcement learning (RL for short).

We first consider finite horizon problems, which involve a finite sequence of successive decisions, and are thus conceptually and analytically simpler. We defer the discussion of the more intricate infinite horizon problems to Chapter 4 and later chapters. We also discuss separately deterministic and stochastic problems (Sections 1.1 and 1.2, respectively).

The reason is that deterministic problems are simpler and lend themselves better as an entry point to the optimal control methodology. Moreover, they have some favorable characteristics, which allow the application of a broader variety of methods. For example, simulation-based methods are greatly simplified and sometimes better understood in the context of deterministic optimal control.

Finally, in Section 1.3 we provide various examples of DP formulations, illustrating some of the concepts of Sections 1.1 and 1.2. The reader with substantial background in DP may wish to just scan Section 1.3 and skip to the next chapter, where we start the development of the approximate DP methodology.

1.1 DETERMINISTIC DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING

All DP problems involve a discrete-time dynamic system that generates a sequence of states under the influence of control. In finite horizon problems the system evolves over a finite number N of time steps (also called stages).

The state and control at time k are denoted by xk and uk , respectively. In deterministic systems, xk+1 is generated nonrandomly, i.e., it is determined solely by xk and uk .

1.1.1

Deterministic Problems

A deterministic DP problem involves a discrete-time dynamic system of the form xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), k = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1,

(1.1)

where k is the time index, xk is the state of the system, an element of some space, uk is the control or decision variable, to be selected at time k from some given set Uk (xk ) that depends on xk ,

Sec. 1.1

) x0

Deterministic Dynamic Programming

...

Control uk

) xk

Future Stages Terminal Cost

Future Stages Terminal Cost gN (xN )

...

xk+1

k

Cost gk (xk , uk )

Stage k

+1

xN

k Future Stages

Figure 1.1.1 Illustration of a deterministic N -stage optimal control problem.

Starting from state xk , the next state under control uk is generated nonrandomly, according to xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), and a stage cost gk (xk , uk ) is incurred.

fk is a function of (xk , uk ) that describes the mechanism by which the state is updated from time k to time k + 1.

N is the horizon or number of times control is applied,

The set of all possible xk is called the state space at time k. It can be any set and can depend on k; this generality is one of the great strengths of the DP methodology. Similarly, the set of all possible uk is called the control space at time k. Again it can be any set and can depend on k.

The problem also involves a cost function that is additive in the sense that the cost incurred at time k, denoted by gk (xk , uk ), accumulates over time. Formally, gk is a function of (xk , uk ) that takes real number values, and may depend on k. For a given initial state x0 , the total cost of a control sequence {u0 , . . . , uN −1 } is

J(x0 ; u0 , . . . , uN −1 ) = gN (xN ) +

N

−1

X

gk (xk , uk ),

(1.2)

k=0

where gN (xN ) is a terminal cost incurred at the end of the process. This cost is a well-defined number, since the control sequence {u0 , . . . , uN −1 } together with x0 determines exactly the state sequence {x1 , . . . , xN } via the system equation (1.1). We want to minimize the cost (1.2) over all sequences {u0 , . . . , uN −1 } that satisfy the control constraints, thereby obtaining the optimal value†

J * (x0 ) =

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

k=0,...,N−1

J(x0 ; u0 , . . . , uN −1 ),

as a function of x0 . Figure 1.1.1 illustrates the main elements of the problem.

We will next illustrate deterministic problems with some examples.

† We use throughout “min” (in place of “inf”) to indicate minimal value over a feasible set of controls, even when we are not sure that the minimum is attained by some feasible control.

Artificial Terminal Node Terminal Arcs with Cost Equal to Ter.. . .Node

Artificial Terminal

Terminal Arcs with Cost Equal to Ter.

Terminal Arcs with Cost Equal to Terminal Cost AB AC CA

s t u

.. . . .

Initial State Stage 0 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage s t u

Artificial Terminal Node Terminal Arcs with Cost Equal to Ter

Artificial Terminal Node Terminal Arcs with Cost Equal to Ter-

.. . . .

.

. .2. Stage N − 11 Stage

Initial

State

Stage

0 0Stage

101Stage

212Stage

Initial

Initial

State

State

Stage

Stage

Stage

0 Stage

Stage

1 Stage

Stage

2 . Stage

Stage N

Initial

State

Stage

Stage

Stage

Figure 1.1.2 Transition graph for a deterministic finite-state system. Nodes correspond to states xk . Arcs correspond to state-control pairs (xk , uk ). An arc

(xk , uk ) has start and end nodes xk and xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), respectively. We view the cost gk (xk , uk ) of the transition as the length of this arc. The problem is equivalent to finding a shortest path from initial node s to terminal node t.

Discrete Optimal Control Problems

There are many situations where the state and control are naturally discrete and take a finite number of values. Such problems are often conveniently specified in terms of an acyclic graph specifying for each state xk the possible transitions to next states xk+1 . The nodes of the graph correspond to states xk and the arcs of the graph correspond to state-control pairs

(xk , uk ). Each arc with start node xk corresponds to a choice of a single control uk ∈ Uk (xk ) and has as end node the next state fk (xk , uk ). The cost of an arc (xk , uk ) is defined as gk (xk , uk ); see Fig. 1.1.2. To handle the final stage, an artificial terminal node t is added. Each state xN at stage

N is connected to the terminal node t with an arc having cost gN (xN ).

Note that control sequences correspond to paths originating at the initial state (node s at stage 0) and terminating at one of the nodes corresponding to the final stage N . If we view the cost of an arc as its length, we see that a deterministic finite-state finite-horizon problem is equivalent to finding a minimum-length (or shortest) path from the initial node s of the graph to the terminal node t. Here, by a path we mean a sequence of arcs such that given two successive arcs in the sequence the end node of the first arc is the same as the start node of the second. By the length of a path we mean the sum of the lengths of its arcs.†

† It turns out also that any shortest path problem (with a possibly nonacyclic graph) can be reformulated as a finite-state deterministic optimal control problem, as we will see in Section 1.3.1. See also [Ber17], Section 2.1, and [Ber98]

for an extensive discussion of shortest path methods, which connects with our discussion here.

Sec. 1.1

Deterministic Dynamic Programming

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC CCD

CBC

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC

BD

ACB CACD

CAB CAD CDA

CAB

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CCB

CD ABC

+ 1 Initial State A C CAC

AB AC CA CD ABC

ACB

CAD CDA

DB

CCD ACD CCAB

SA

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC

ACB

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA

SC

+ 1 Initial State A C ABCCA

AC CA

ACB ACD

+ 1 Initial State A C AB ACCCD

CA CD

ACB

ACD

CAB

ACD CAB CCAD

BD

CD

CABABC

CDA

CD ABC

CAD

CAB

CAD CCDA

DB

ABC

CDA

CAD

CDA CAB

Figure 1.1.3 The transition graph of the deterministic scheduling problem of Example 1.1.1. Each arc of the graph corresponds to a decision leading from some state (the start node of the arc) to some other state (the end node of the arc). The corresponding cost is shown next to the arc. The cost of the last operation is shown as a terminal cost next to the terminal nodes of the graph.

Generally, combinatorial optimization problems can be formulated as deterministic finite-state finite-horizon optimal control problem. The following scheduling example illustrates the idea.

Example 1.1.1 (A Deterministic Scheduling Problem)

Suppose that to produce a certain product, four operations must be performed on a certain machine. The operations are denoted by A, B, C, and D. We assume that operation B can be performed only after operation A has been performed, and operation D can be performed only after operation C has been performed. (Thus the sequence CDAB is allowable but the sequence

CDBA is not.) The setup cost Cmn for passing from any operation m to any other operation n is given. There is also an initial startup cost SA or SC for starting with operation A or C, respectively (cf. Fig. 1.1.3). The cost of a sequence is the sum of the setup costs associated with it; for example, the operation sequence ACDB has cost

SA + CAC + CCD + CDB .

We can view this problem as a sequence of three decisions, namely the choice of the first three operations to be performed (the last operation is

determined from the preceding three). It is appropriate to consider as state the set of operations already performed, the initial state being an artificial state corresponding to the beginning of the decision process. The possible state transitions corresponding to the possible states and decisions for this problem are shown in Fig. 1.1.3. Here the problem is deterministic, i.e., at a given state, each choice of control leads to a uniquely determined state.

For example, at state AC the decision to perform operation D leads to state

ACD with certainty, and has cost CCD . Thus the problem can be conveniently represented in terms of the transition graph of Fig. 1.1.3. The optimal solution corresponds to the path that starts at the initial state and ends at some state at the terminal time and has minimum sum of arc costs plus the terminal cost.

Continuous-Spaces Optimal Control Problems

Many classical problems in control theory involve a state that belongs to a

Euclidean space, i.e., the space of n-dimensional vectors of real variables, where n is some positive integer. The following is representative of the class of linear-quadratic problems, where the system equation is linear, the cost function is quadratic, and there are no control constraints. In our example, the states and controls are one-dimensional, but there are multidimensional extensions, which are very popular (see [Ber17], Section 3.1).

Example 1.1.2 (A Linear-Quadratic Problem)

A certain material is passed through a sequence of N ovens (see Fig. 1.1.4).

Denote x0 : initial temperature of the material, xk , k = 1, . . . , N : temperature of the material at the exit of oven k, uk−1 , k = 1, . . . , N : heat energy applied to the material in oven k.

In practice there will be some constraints on uk , such as nonnegativity.

However, for analytical tractability one may also consider the case where uk is unconstrained, and check later if the solution satisfies some natural restrictions in the problem at hand.

We assume a system equation of the form xk+1 = (1 − a)xk + auk ,

k = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1,

where a is a known scalar from the interval (0, 1). The objective is to get the final temperature xN close to a given target T , while expending relatively little energy. We express this with a cost function of the form

N−1

r(xN − T )2 +

X k=0

where r > 0 is a given scalar.

u2k ,

Sec. 1.1

Deterministic Dynamic Programming

Initial Temperature

Oven 1 Oven 2 Final Temperature

Initial Temperature x

Oven

Oven

Final

Temperature

Oven

Oven

2Initial

Final Temperature

Temperature

Initial Temperature x0 x2

Oven 1 Oven 2 Final Temperature

Initial Temperature u0

0 u1

Figure 1.1.4 The linear-quadratic problem of Example 1.1.2 for N = 2. The temperature of the material evolves according to the system equation xk+1 =

(1 − a)xk + auk , where a is some scalar with 0 < a < 1.

Linear-quadratic problems with no constraints on the state or the control admit a nice analytical solution, as we will see later in Section 1.3.6.

In another frequently arising optimal control problem there are linear constraints on the state and/or the control. In the preceding example it would have been natural to require that ak ≤ xk ≤ bk and/or ck ≤ uk ≤ dk , where ak , bk , ck , dk are given scalars. Then the problem would be solvable not only by DP but also by quadratic programming methods. Generally deterministic optimal control problems with continuous state and control spaces

(in addition to DP) admit a solution by nonlinear programming methods, such as gradient, conjugate gradient, and Newton’s method, which can be suitably adapted to their special structure.

1.1.2

The Dynamic Programming Algorithm

The DP algorithm rests on a simple idea, the principle of optimality, which roughly states the following; see Fig. 1.1.5.

Principle of Optimality

Let {u∗0 , . . . , u∗N −1 } be an optimal control sequence, which together with x0 determines the corresponding state sequence {x∗1 , . . . , x∗N } via the system equation (1.1). Consider the subproblem whereby we start at x∗k at time k and wish to minimize the “cost-to-go” from time k to time N ,

N

−1

X gk (x∗k , uk ) + gm (xm , um ) + gN (xN ), m=k+1

over {uk , . . . , uN −1 } with um ∈ Um (xm ), m = k, . . . , N − 1. Then the truncated optimal control sequence {u∗k , . . . , u∗N −1 } is optimal for this subproblem.

Stated succinctly, the principle of optimality says that the tail of an optimal sequence is optimal for the tail subproblem. Its intuitive justification is simple. If the truncated control sequence {u∗k , . . . , u∗N −1 } were not optimal as stated, we would be able to reduce the cost further by switching

Tail subproblem Time

Tail subproblem Time x∗k

{

Future Cost

Stages0 Terminal

Cost k N

Tail subproblem

Time

Cost kN

Optimal control sequence {u∗0 , . . . , u∗k , . . . , u∗N −1 }

Optimal control sequence

Figure 1.1.5 Illustration of the principle of optimality. The tail {u∗k , . . . , u∗N−1 } of an optimal sequence {u∗0 , . . . , u∗N−1 } is optimal for the tail subproblem that starts at the state x∗k of the optimal trajectory {x∗1 , . . . , x∗N }.

to an optimal sequence for the subproblem once we reach x∗k (since the preceding choices u∗0 , . . . , u∗k−1 of controls do not restrict our future choices).

For an auto travel analogy, suppose that the fastest route from Los Angeles to Boston passes through Chicago. The principle of optimality translates to the obvious fact that the Chicago to Boston portion of the route is also the fastest route for a trip that starts from Chicago and ends in Boston.

The principle of optimality suggests that the optimal cost function can be constructed in piecemeal fashion going backwards: first compute the optimal cost function for the “tail subproblem” involving the last stage, then solve the “tail subproblem” involving the last two stages, and continue in this manner until the optimal cost function for the entire problem is constructed.

The DP algorithm is based on this idea: it proceeds sequentially, by solving all the tail subproblems of a given time length, using the solution of the tail subproblems of shorter time length. We illustrate the algorithm with the scheduling problem of Example 1.1.1. The calculations are simple but tedious, and may be skipped without loss of continuity. However, they may be worth going over by a reader that has no prior experience in the use of DP.

Example 1.1.1 (Scheduling Problem - Continued)

Let us consider the scheduling Example 1.1.1, and let us apply the principle of optimality to calculate the optimal schedule. We have to schedule optimally the four operations A, B, C, and D. The numerical values of the transition and setup costs are shown in Fig. 1.1.6 next to the corresponding arcs.

According to the principle of optimality, the “tail” portion of an optimal schedule must be optimal. For example, suppose that the optimal schedule is CABD. Then, having scheduled first C and then A, it must be optimal to complete the schedule with BD rather than with DB. With this in mind, we solve all possible tail subproblems of length two, then all tail subproblems of length three, and finally the original problem that has length four (the subproblems of length one are of course trivial because there is only one operation that is as yet unscheduled). As we will see shortly, the tail subproblems of

Sec. 1.1

Deterministic Dynamic Programming

length k + 1 are easily solved once we have solved the tail subproblems of length k, and this is the essence of the DP technique.

10 CA

5 7 CD

8 3ABC

9 6 1 2

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC

3 5 2 4 6 2

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC

CAB CAD CDA

6 1ACD

10 5 7 8103 59 76 81 32 9ACB

3 5 2 4 6 2

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC

3 5CA

2 4CD

6 2ABC

+ 1 Initial State A C 3AB

5 2AC

4 6CA

2 CD ABC

8 3CAB

9 6 CAD

1 2 CDA

10 5 7 8 3 9 63 15 22 10

4ACB

6 52 7ACD

3 5 2 4 6 2

10 5 7 8 3 9 6 1 2

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC

10 ACB

5 7 ACD

8 3 9CAB

6 1CAD

CDA

+ 1 Initial

31 52 CA

2 4 CD

6 2 ABC

10 5State

7 8A 3C 9AB

6 AC

3 5 2 4 6 2

+ 1 Initial State A 3C

ABC

5 AB

25 47AC

6 82 3CA

3 5 92CD

64 61

ACB ACD 10

CAB

5 7CAD

8 3CDA

9 6 1 2

10 53 57 28 4 36 92 6 1 2

+ 1 Initial State A C AB AC CA CD ABC
