$

˜ gk xm , µm (xm ), wm + J k+ℓ (xk+ℓ )

Lookahead Minimization Cost-to-go Approximation

...Lookahead

MCTS Lookahead

Minimization

Cost-to-go

Approximation

Minimization

Cost-to-go

Approximation

Figure 2.2.1 Illustration of approximation in value space with ℓ-step lookahead.

J˜k+1 is obtained itself on the basis of a one-step lookahead approximation.

In other words, for all possible states xk+1 that can be generated via the system equation starting from xk , xk+1 = fk (xk , uk , wk ), we have

J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) =

min

uk+1 ∈Uk+1 (xk+1 )

n

E gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 )

o

+ J˜k+2 fk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 ) ,

* .

where J˜k+2 is some approximation of the optimal cost-to-go function Jk+2

Thus two-step lookahead amounts to solving a two-stage version of the DP problem with xk as the initial state and J˜k+2 as the terminal cost function. Given xk , the solution of this DP problem yields a two-stage policy that consists of the single control uk for the first lookahead stage, plus a control µk+1 (xk+1 ) for each value of xk+1 = fk (xk , uk , wk ) that can occur at the second lookahead stage k + 1. However, once this two-stage policy is computed, the controls µk+1 (xk+1 ) are discarded, and only uk is used as the control applied by the two-step lookahead policy at xk . At the next stage, this process is repeated, i.e., we solve a two-stage DP problem with xk+1 as the initial state and J˜k+3 as the terminal cost function.

Policies with lookahead of ℓ > 2 stages are similarly defined: at state xk , we solve an ℓ-stage version of the DP problem with xk as the initial state and J˜k+ℓ as the terminal cost function, and use the first control of the ℓ-stage policy thus obtained, while discarding the others; see Fig.

2.2.1. Of course, in the final stages where k > N − ℓ, we should shorten the size of lookahead to N − k. Note that the simplifications in the onestep lookahead minimization discussed in Section 2.1.2 (assumed certainty equivalence, adaptive sampling, etc), and model-free policy implementation

(Section 2.1.3) extend to multistep lookahead.

2.2.1

Multistep Lookahead and Rolling Horizon

There are several ways to compute the lookahead functions J˜k+ℓ in ℓstep lookahead, similar to the one-step lookahead case. However, there is also another possibility: with sufficiently long lookahead, we may capture enough of the character of the DP problem at hand so that a sophisticated choice of J˜k+ℓ may not be needed.

In particular, we may set J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) ≡ 0, or set

J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) = gN (xk+ℓ ).

The idea is to use a sufficiently large number of lookahead steps ℓ to ensure a reasonably faithful approximation of the optimal Q-factors Qk or cost-to* go functions Jk+ℓ within a constant.† This is also referred to as the rolling horizon approach, but essentially it is the same as multistep lookahead with a simplified cost-to-go approximation. Note that the idea of a rolling horizon is well-suited and applies with few modifications to infinite horizon problems as well.‡

Typically, as the size ℓ of the lookahead is chosen larger, the need for a good choice of J˜k+ℓ tends to diminish. The reason is that the effective cost-to-go approximation in ℓ-step lookahead consists of two components:

(a) The cost of an (ℓ − 1) step problem involving the last (ℓ − 1) stages of the ℓ-step lookahead.

(b) The terminal cost approximation J˜k+ℓ .

Since the (ℓ − 1)-step problem is treated by exact optimization, the overall approximation will be accurate if the contribution of the terminal cost approximation is relatively insignificant. This is likely to be true with large enough ℓ.

Thus, one is tempted to conjecture that if ℓ is increased, then the performance of the lookahead policy is improved. This, however, need not be true always, essentially because beyond the next ℓ stages, the policy may be “blind” to the presence of particularly “favorable” or “unfavorable” states. The following example is an illustration.

† See the discussion in Section 2.1.4. Generally, rolling horizon schemes tend to work well if the probability distribution of the state k+ℓ steps ahead is roughly independent of the current state and control, or is concentrated around “low cost” states.

‡ For infinite horizon problems the cost-to-go approximations J˜k will typically be the same at all stages k, i.e., J˜k ≡ J˜ for some J˜. As a result, the limited lookahead approach produces a stationary policy. In the case of discounted problems with an infinite horizon (see Chapter 4), a simple approach is to use a rolling horizon that is long enough so that the tail cost is negligible and can be replaced by zero, but it is also possible to use a small number of lookahead stages ℓ, as

˜ long as we compensate with a terminal cost function approximation J.

Sec. 2.2

Multistep Lookahead

0 1 2 1lookahead

10 2-Step3-Step lookahead

3-Step2lookahead

2 Stages 3 Stages

0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

Stages 3 Stages

0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

1 Optimal

2 1 10 2-Step lookahead 3-Step lookahead

2 Stages

3 Stages 3-Step lookahead 2 Stages 3

4 0u trajectory

Low Cost u r x Initial

x0

Current State Current

Stage 1 2

0 x4

High Cost Suboptimal

High Cost u′

2 Stages

3 Stages

4 0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead 3-Step

0 1lookahead

2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

3-Step lookahead 2 Stages 3 S

0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

3-Step lookahead lookahead 3-Step

2 Stages

3 Stages 2 Stages 3 Stage

1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

4 0

0 1 2 1 10 2-step lookahead 3-step lookahead 2 Stages 3 Stages

0 1 2 1 10 2-step lookahead 3-step lookahead 2 Stages 3 Stages

Figure 2.2.2 The 4-stage deterministic shortest problem of Example 2.2.1, illustrating how using a longer lookahead with a cost function approximation

J˜k (xk ) ≡ 0 may degrade the performance of the policy obtained.

Example 2.2.1

This is an oversimplified example that demonstrates a pitfall of the multistep lookahead and rolling horizon approaches with approximate cost-to-go functions

J˜k (xk ) ≡ 0.

It may happen that with longer lookahead the quality of the suboptimal control obtained is degraded.

Consider the 4-stage deterministic shortest problem of Fig. 2.2.2. At the initial state there are two possible controls, denoted u and u′ . At all other states there is only one control available, so a policy is specified by just the initial choice between controls u and u′ . The costs of the four transitions on the upper and the lower path are shown next to the corresponding arcs

(0, 1, 2, 1 for the upper path and 0, 2, 0, 10 on the lower path). From the initial state, 2-step lookahead with terminal cost approximation J˜2 = 0, compares

0 + 1 with 0 + 2 and prefers the optimal control u, while 3-step lookahead with terminal cost approximation J˜3 = 0, compares 0 + 1 + 2 with 0 + 2 + 0 and prefers the suboptimal control u′ . Thus using a longer lookahead yields worse performance. The problem here has to do with large cost changes at the

“edge” of the lookahead (a cost of 0 just after the 2-step lookahead, followed by a cost of 10 just after the 3-step lookahead).

2.2.2

Multistep Lookahead and Deterministic Problems

Generally, the implementation of multistep lookahead can be prohibitively time-consuming for stochastic problems, because it requires at each step the solution of a stochastic DP problem with a horizon that is equal to the size of the lookahead. However, when the problem is deterministic, the lookahead problems are also deterministic, and can be solved by shortest

...

Cost Function Approximation

e Monte Carlo tree search Lookahead tree xk

Cost Function Approximation

Cost Function Approximation J˜k+ℓ

...

Certainty equivalence Monte Carlo tree search Lookahead tree ty equivalence Monte Carlo tree search Lookahead tree ℓ Steps

Shortest path problem

Figure 2.2.3 Multistep lookahead for a deterministic finite-state problem. The lookahead minimization is equivalent to a shortest path problem.

path methods for a finite spaces problem, or even for an infinite spaces problem after some form of discretization. This makes deterministic problems particularly good candidates for the use of long-step lookahead in conjunction with the rolling horizon approach that we discussed in the preceding section.

Similarly, for a continuous-spaces deterministic optimal control problem, the lookahead minimization may be conveniently solvable by nonlinear programming methods. This idea finds wide application in the context of model predictive control (see the discussion in Section 2.5).

Partially Deterministic Form of Multistep Lookahead

When the problem is stochastic, one may consider a hybrid, partially deterministic approach: at state xk , allow for a stochastic disturbance wk at the current stage, but fix the future disturbances wk+1 , . . . , wk+ℓ−1 , up to the end of the lookahead horizon, to some typical values. This allows us to bring to bear deterministic methods in the computation of approximate costs-to-go beyond the first stage.

In particular, with this approach, the needed values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) will be computed by solving an ℓ − 1-step deterministic shortest path problem involving the typical values of the disturbances wk+1 , . . . , wk+ℓ−1 . Then the values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) will be used to compute the approximate Q-factors of pairs (xk , uk ) using the formula n

o

Q̃k (xk , uk ) = E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

which incorporates the first stage uncertainty. Finally, the control chosen by such a scheme at time k will be µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk );

cf. Eq. (2.7).

The idea of fixing uncertain quantities to typical values for approximation purposes is generally referred to as (assumed) certainty equivalence, and will be discussed at length in Section 2.3.2. The idea of using multistep lookahead for deterministic problems will also be reexamined in the context of the rollout algorithm in Section 2.4.1.

2.3 PROBLEM APPROXIMATION

A key issue in implementing a limited lookahead policy is the choice of the cost-to-go approximation at the end of the lookahead. In this section, we discuss the problem approximation approach whereby we approximate the optimal cost function Jk* with some function J˜k derived from a related but simpler problem (for example the optimal cost-to-go function of that problem). In the following subsections we consider two approaches:

(1) Simplifying the structure of the problem through enforced decomposition, e.g., replacing coupling constraints with simpler decoupled constraints or with Lagrange multiplier-related penalties.

(2) Simplifying the probabilistic structure of the problem, e.g., replacing stochastic disturbances with deterministic ones.

Another approach that can be viewed as problem approximation is aggregation, whereby the original problem is approximated with a related “aggregate” problem that has smaller dimension or fewer states. This problem is solved exactly to yield a cost-to-go approximation for the original problem.

Aggregation is also related to the feature-based parametric approximation ideas of Chapter 3, and will be discussed in Chapter 5.

2.3.1

Enforced Decomposition

The simplification/approximation approach is often well-suited for problems involving a number of subsystems that are coupled through the system equation, or the cost function, or the control constraints, but the degree of coupling is “relatively weak.” It is difficult to define precisely what constitutes “weak coupling,” but in specific problem contexts, usually this type of structure is easily recognized. For such problems it is often sensible to introduce approximations by artificially decoupling the subsystems in some way, thereby creating either a simpler problem or a simpler cost calculation, where subsystems can be dealt with in isolation.

There are a number of different ways to effect enforced decomposition, and the best approach is often problem-dependent. Generally, for a deterministic problem, enforced decomposition can be applied both off-line and on-line to produce a suboptimal control sequence. For a stochastic problem, it can be applied with off-line computation of the approximate cost-togo functions J˜k and on-line computation of the corresponding suboptimal policy. We will illustrate these two possibilities with various application contexts in what follows.

Optimization of One Subsystem at a Time

When a problem involves multiple subsystems, a potentially interesting approximation approach is to optimize one subsystem at a time. In this way the control computation at time k may become simpler.

As an example consider an N -stage deterministic problem, where the control uk at state xk consists of n components, uk = {u1k , . . . , unk }, with uik corresponding to the ith subsystem. Then to compute a cost-to-go approximation at a given state xk , one may optimize over the control sequence of a single subsystem, while keeping the controls of the remaining subsystems at some nominal values. Thus, upon arriving at xk , we first optimize over the control sequence {u1k , u1k+1 , . . . , u1N −1 } of the first subsystem, then optimize over the controls of the second subsystem, and so on, while keeping the controls of the other subsystem at the latest “optimal” values computed.

There are several possible variations; for example to make the order in which the subsystems are considered subject to optimization as well, or to repeat cycling through the subsystems multiple times, each time using the results of the latest computation as nominal values of subsystem controls. This is similar to a “coordinate descent” approach, used in other optimization contexts.

Additional variations are obtained when we use approximate minimization over uk in Eq. (2.1), and also when the expected value over wk is computed approximately via adaptive simulation or a certainty equivalence approximation (cf. Section 2.1.2).

Example 2.3.1 (Vehicle Routing)

Consider n vehicles that move along the arcs of a given graph. Each node of the graph has a known “value” and the first vehicle that will pass through the node will collect its value, while vehicles that pass subsequently through the node do not collect any value. This may serve as a model of a situation where there are various valuable tasks to be performed at the nodes of a transportation network, and each task can be performed at most once and by a single vehicle. We assume that each vehicle starts at a given node and after at most a given number of arc moves, it must return to some other

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Vehicle 1 Vehicle 2

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Vehicle 1 Vehicle 2

Figure 2.3.1 Schematic illustration of the vehicle routing problem and the onevehicle-at-a-time approach. As an example, given the position pair xk = (1, 4) of the two vehicles and the current valuable tasks at positions 6 and 9, we consider moves to all possible positions pairs xk+1 :

(2, 2), (2, 3), (2, 6), (2, 7), (3, 2), (3, 3), (3, 6), (3, 7).

From each of these pairs, we first compute the best route of vehicle 1 assuming vehicle 2 does not move, and then the best route vehicle 2, taking into account the previously computed route of vehicle 1. We then select the pair xk+1 that results in optimal value, and move the vehicles to the corresponding positions.

given node. The problem is to find a route for each vehicle satisfying these constraints, so that the total value collected by the vehicles is maximized.

This is a difficult combinatorial problem that in principle can be approached by DP. In particular, we can view as state the n-tuple of current positions of the vehicles together with the list of nodes that have been visited by some vehicle in the past, and have thus “lost” their value. Unfortunately, the number of these states is enormous (it increases exponentially with the number of nodes and the number of vehicles). The version of the problem that involves a single vehicle, while still difficult in principle, can often be solved in reasonable time either exactly by DP or fairly accurately using a suitable heuristic. Thus a one-step lookahead policy suggests itself, with the value-to-go approximation obtained by solving single vehicle problems.

In particular, in a one-step lookahead scheme, at a given time k and from a given state xk we consider all possible n-tuples of moves by the n vehicles. At the resulting state xk+1 corresponding to each n-tuple of vehicle moves, we approximate the optimal value-to-go with the value corresponding to a suboptimal set of paths. These paths are obtained as follows: we fix an order of the vehicles and we calculate a path for the first vehicle, starting at xk+1 , assuming the other vehicles do not move. (This is done either optimally by DP, or near optimally using some heuristic.) Then we calculate a path for the second vehicle, taking into account the value collected by the first vehicle,

and we similarly continue: for each vehicle, we calculate in the given order a path, taking into account the value collected by the preceding vehicles. We end up with a set of paths that have a certain total value associated with them. This is the value J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) associated with the successor state xk+1 .

We repeat with all successor states xk+1 corresponding to all the n-tuples of vehicle moves that are possible at xk . We then use as suboptimal control at xk the n-tuple of moves that yields the best value; see Fig. 2.3.1.

There are several enhancements and variations of the scheme just described. For example, we can consider multiple alternative orders for optimizing paths one-at-a-time, and choose the n-tuple of moves that corresponds to the best value obtained. Other variations may include travel costs between nodes of the graph, and constraints on how many tasks can be performed by each vehicle.

Constraint Decoupling by Constraint Relaxation

Let us now consider problems involving coupled subsystems where the coupling comes only through the control constraint. Typical cases involve the allocation of a limited resource to a set of subsystems whose system equations are completely decoupled from each other. We will illustrate with examples a few enforced decomposition approaches to deal with such situations. The first approach is constraint relaxation, whereby the constraint set is replaced by another constraint set that does not involve coupling.

Example 2.3.2 (Restless Multiarmed Bandit Problems)

An interesting DP model, generally referred to as the multiarmed bandit problem, involves n projects of which only one can be worked on at any time period. Each project i is characterized at time k by its state xik . If project i is worked on at time k, one receives an expected reward Ri (xik ), and the state xik then evolves according to the equation xik+1 = f i (xik , wki ),

if i is worked on at time k,

where wki is a random disturbance with probability distribution depending on xik but not on prior disturbances. If project i is not worked on, its state changes according to i

xik+1 = f (xik , wik ), i

where f is a given function and wik is a random disturbance with distribution i depending on xik but not on prior disturbances. Furthermore, a reward R (xik )

i is earned, where R is a given function. The projects are coupled through the control constraint (only one of the projects may be worked on at any one

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

period). † A suboptimal enforced decomposition approach is to consider the n single project problems where a single project is worked on through the entire remaining horizon, and add the contributions of the n problems to form an optimal reward approximation.

In particular, suppose that the optimal reward function Jk∗ (x1 , . . . , xn )

is approximated by a separable function of the form n

X

J˜ik (xi ),

i=1

where each J˜ik is a function that quantifies the contribution of the ith project to the total reward. The corresponding one-step lookahead policy selects at time k the project i that maximizes

Ri (xi ) +

X

j

R (xj ) + E J˜ik+1 f i (xi , wi )



j6=i



+

X

n

j

E J˜jk+1 f (xj , wj )

j6=i

o

,

which can also be written as

n

i i

Ri (xi ) − R (xi ) + E J˜ik+1 f i (xi , wi ) −J˜ik+1 f (xi , wi )

+

n n

X



j j

R (xj ) + E J˜jk+1 f (xj , wj )



j=1

o

 o

.

Noting that the last term in the above expression does not depend on i, it follows that the one-step lookahead policy takes the form work on project i

m̃ik (xi ) = max m̃jk (xj ) ,

if



j

where for all i,

i i m̃ik (xi ) = Ri (xi ) − R (xi ) + E J˜ik+1 f i (xi , wi ) −J˜ik+1 f (xi , wi )







.

† In the classical and simplest version of the problem, the state of a project that is not worked on remains unchanged and produces no reward, i.e., xik+1 = xik ,

i

R (xik ) = 0,

if i is not worked on at time k.

This problem admits optimal policies with a nice structure that can be computationally exploited. The problem has a long history and is discussed in many sources; we refer to [Ber12] and the references quoted there. In particular, in favorable instances of the problem, optimal policies have the character of an index rule, which is structurally similar to the decoupled suboptimal decision rules discussed in this section, and has been analyzed extensively, together with its variations and special cases. The term “restless” in the title of the present example, introduced by Whittle [Whi88], refers to the fact that the states of the projects that are not worked on may change.

An important question for the implementation of the preceding suboptimal control scheme is the determination of the separable reward function terms J˜ik+1 . There are several possibilities here, and the best choice may strongly depend on the problem’s structure. One possibility is to compute

J˜ik+1 as the optimal cost-to-go function for a problem involving just project i, i.e., assuming that none of the other projects j 6= i will be worked on for the remaining periods k +1, . . . , N −1. This corresponds to restricting the control constraint set of the problem, and involves a single-project optimization that may be tractable.

An alternative possibility is to use a separable parametric approximation of the form n

X

i

J˜ik+1 (xik+1 , rk+1

),

i=1

i i where rk+1 are vectors of “tunable” parameters. The values of rk+1 can be obtained by some “training” algorithm such as the ones to be discussed in

Chapter 3.

Constraint Decoupling by Lagrangian Relaxation

Another approach to deal with coupled constraints is to replace them with linear Lagrange multiplier-related penalty functions that are added to the cost function. We illustrate this approach with an extension of the preceding multiarmed bandit Example 2.3.2.

Example 2.3.3 (Separable Lower Bound Approximation in

Multiarmed Bandit Problems)

Let us consider a version of the multiple projects Example 2.3.2 involving a more general form of control. Here there are n subsystems, with a control uik applied to subsystem i at time k. Instead of the requirement that only one subsystem is worked on at any one time, we assume a control constraint of the form uk = (u1k , . . . , un k = 0, 1, . . . , k ) ∈ U, where the set U is given (Example 2.3.2 is obtained as the special case where

U consists of the union of the coordinate vectors, i.e., those whose components are equal to 0, except for one component that is equal to 1). The ith subsystem is described by xik+1 = f i (xik , uik , wki ),

i = 1, . . . , n, k = 0, 1, . . . ,

where xik is the state taking values in some space, uik is the control, wki is a random disturbance, and f i is a given function. We assume that wki is selected according to a probability distribution that may depend on xik and uik , but not on prior disturbances or the disturbances wkj of the other subsystems j 6= i. The cost incurred at the kth stage by the ith subsystem is g i (xik , uik , wki ),

(2.13)

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

where g i is a given one-stage cost function. For notational convenience, we assume stationarity of the system equation and the cost per stage, but the approach to be discussed applies to the nonstationary case as well.

One possibility for a separable approximation of the problem is to replace the constraint uk ∈ U by a smaller or larger decoupled constraint, i.e., requiring that uik ∈ U i ,

i = 1, . . . , n, k = 0, 1, . . . ,

where the subsets U 1 , . . . , U n satisfy U 1 × · · · × U n ⊂ U or U ⊂ U 1 × · · · × U n , respectively.

We discuss another possibility for the case where the constraint set U includes linear inequality constraints. As a simple example, let us focus on a constraint set U of the form

U=

(

n

(u , . . . , u )

i

i

u ∈ U ⊂ ℜ, i = 1, . . . , n,

n

X

i i

cu ≤b

i=1

)

,

(2.14)

where c1 , . . . , cn , and b are some scalars. † Here we replace the coupling constraint n

X

ci uik ≤ b,

k = 0, 1, . . . ,

(2.15)

i=1

by a “relaxed” (larger) constraint whereby we require that

N−1

n

XX

ci uik ≤ N b.

(2.16)

k=0 i=1

Roughly speaking, the constraint (2.16) requires that the coupling constraint

(2.15) is satisfied “on the average,” over the N stages.

We may now obtain a lower bound approximation of the optimal cost of our problem by assigning a scalar Lagrange multiplier λ ≥ 0 to the constraint

(2.16), and add a Lagrangian term

N−1

λ

n

XX k=0 i=1

ci uik

− Nb

!

(2.17)

to the cost function. This amounts to replacing the kth stage cost (2.13) by g i (xik , uik , wki ) + λci uik , while replacing the coupling constraint (2.14) with the decoupled constraint uik ∈ U i ,

i = 1, . . . , n,

† More general cases, where ui and b are multi-dimensional, and ci are replaced by matrices of appropriate dimension, can be handled similarly, albeit with greater computational complications.

cf. Eq. (2.14). This is a lower bound approximation, as is typical in Lagrange multiplier-based decomposition approaches in linear and nonlinear programming (see e.g., [BeT97], [Ber16b]). To see this, note that for every feasible solution of the original problem, the Lagrangian term (2.17) makes a nonpositive contribution when added to the cost function, while with the constraint relaxed, the resulting optimal cost can only be reduced further.

With the subsystems now decoupled, we may solve each single subsystem problem separately, thereby obtaining a separable lower bound approximation n

X

J˜ik (xik , λ)
