and the least squares problem in Eq. (4.71) has the form min r

q

X s=1

2 φ(is )′ r − g(is , is+1 ) − αφ(is+1 )′ r .

(4.74)

By setting the gradient of the minimized expression to zero, we obtain the condition for r to attain the above minimum:

q

X s=1

 φ(is ) φ(is )′ r − g(is , is+1 ) − αφ(is+1 )′ r = 0.

(4.75)

Solving this equation for r yields the LSTD(0) solution:

r=

q

X

φ(is )

s=1

φ(is )

−

′ αφ(is+1 )

!−1

q

X

φ(is )g(is , is+1 ).

(4.76)

s=1

Note that the inverse in the preceding equation must exist for the method to be well-defined; otherwise the iteration has to be modified. A modification may also be needed when the matrix inverted is nearly singular; in this case the simulation noise may introduce serious numerical problems. Various methods have been developed to deal with the near singularity issue; see Wang and Bertsekas [WaB13a], [WaB13b], and the DP textbook [Ber12], Section 7.3.

The expression ds (r) = φ(is )′ r − g(is , is+1 ) − αφ(is )′ r

(4.77)

that appears in the least squares sum minimization (4.74) and Eq. (4.75)

is referred to as the temporal difference associated with the sth transition and parameter vector r. In the artificial intelligence literature, temporal differences are viewed as fundamental to learning and are accordingly interpreted, but we will not go further in this direction; see the RL textbooks that we have cited.

The LSPE(0) method is similarly derived. It consists of a simulationbased approximation of the projected value iteration method



Jk+1 = Π̃ Tµ Jk ,

[cf. Eq. (4.73)]. At the kth iteration, it uses only the samples s = 1, . . . , k, and updates the parameter vector according to

rk+1

=

rk

−

k

X s=1

φ(is )φ(is )′

!−1

k

X s=1

φ(is )ds (rs ),

k = 1, 2, . . . , (4.78)

Sec. 4.9

Additional Methods - Temporal Differences

where ds (rs ) is the temporal difference of Eq. (4.77), evaluated at the iterate of iteration s; the form of this iteration is derived similar to the case of

LSTD(0). After q iterations, when all the samples have been processed, the vector rq obtained is the one used for the approximate evaluation of Jµ .

Note that the inverse in Eq. (4.78) can be updated economically from one iteration to the next, using fast linear algebra operations (cf. the discussion of the incremental Newton method in Section 3.1.3).

Overall, it can be shown that LSTD(0) and LSPE(0) [with efficient matrix inversion in Eq. (4.78)] require essentially identical amount of work to process the q samples associated with the current policy µ [this is also true for the LSTD(λ) and LSPE(λ) methods; see [Ber12], Section 6.3].

An advantage offered by LSPE(0) is that because it is iterative, it allows carrying over the final parameter vector rq , as a “hot start” when passing from one policy evaluation to the next, in the context of an approximate

PI scheme.

The TD(0) method has the form rk+1 = rk − γ k φ(ik )dk (rk ),

k = 1, 2, . . . ,

(4.79)

where γ k is a diminishing stepsize parameter. It can be seen that TD(0)

resembles an incremental gradient iteration for solving the least squares training problem (4.74), but with r replaced by the current iterate rk . The reason is that the gradient of the typical kth term in the least squares sum of Eq. (4.74) is the vector φ(ik )dk (rk ) that appears in the TD(0)

iteration (4.79) (cf. Section 3.1.3). Thus at each iteration, TD(0) uses only one sample, and changes rk in the opposite direction to the corresponding incremental gradient using a stepsize γ k that must be carefully controlled.

By contrast the LSPE(0) iteration (4.78) uses the full sum k

X

φ(is )ds (rs ),

s=1

which may be viewed as an aggregated incremental method, with scaling

P

−1 k s s ′ provided by the matrix

. This explains why TD(0) is s=1 φ(i )φ(i )

generally much slower and more fragile than LSPE(0). On the other hand

TD(0) is simpler than both LSTD(0) and LSPE(0), and does not require a matrix inversion, which may be inconvenient when the column dimension m of Φ is large.

The properties, the analysis, and the implementation of TD methods in the context of approximate PI are quite complicated. In particular, the issue of exploration is important and must be addressed. Moreover there are convergence, oscillation, and reliability issues to contend with.

LSTD(λ) relies on matrix inversion and not on iteration, so it does not have a serious convergence issue, but the system (4.72) may be singular or near

singular, in which case very accurate simulation is needed to approximate C well enough for its inversion to be reliable; remedies for the case of a singular or near singular system are discussed in the papers [WaB13a], [WaB13b]

(see also [Ber12], Section 7.3). LSPE(λ) has a convergence issue because

(λ)

the mapping ΠTµ may not be a contraction mapping (even though Tµ is)

and the projected value iteration (4.73) may not be convergent (it turns out

(λ)

that the mapping ΠTµ is guaranteed to be a contraction for λ sufficiently close to 1).

Direct and Indirect Policy Evaluation Methods

In trying to compare the approximate policy evaluation methods discussed in this section, we may draw a distinction between direct methods, which aim to compute approximately the projection Π(Jµ ), and indirect methods, which try to solve the projected equation (4.69).

The method of Section 4.7.2 is direct and is based on Eq. (4.68). In particular, as N → ∞ and q → ∞, it yields the approximate evaluation

Π(Jµ ). The TD methods are indirect, and aim at computing the solution of the projected equation (4.69). The solution of this equation is of the form Φrλ∗ , where the parameter vector rλ∗ depends on λ. In particular the projected equation solution Φrλ∗ is different from Π(Jµ ). It can be shown that it satisfies the error bound

where

kJµ − Φrλ∗ kξ ≤ p kJµ − ΠJµ kξ ,

1 − α2λ αλ =

(4.80)

α(1 − λ)

1 − αλ

and k · kξ is a special projection norm of the form (4.57), where ξ is the steady-state probability distribution of the controlled system Markov chain under policy µ. Moreover as λ → 1 the projected equation solution Φrλ∗ approaches Π(Jµ ). Based on this fact, methods which aim to compute

Π(Jµ ), such as the direct method of Section 4.7.2 are sometimes called

TD(1). We refer to [Ber12], Section 6.3, for an account of this analysis, which is beyond the scope of this book.

The difference Π(Jµ ) − Φrλ∗ is commonly referred to as the bias and is illustrated in Figure 4.9.1. As indicated in this figure and as the estimate

(4.80) suggests, there is a bias-variance tradeoff . As λ is decreased, the solution of the projected equation (4.69) changes and more bias is introduced relative to the “ideal” approximation ΠJµ (this bias can be embarassingly large as shown by examples in the paper [Ber95]). At the same time, how(λ)

ever, the simulation samples of Tµ J contain less noise as λ is decreased.

This provides another view of the bias-variance tradeoff, which we discussed in Section 4.7.2 in connection with the use of short trajectories.

Sec. 4.10

Exact and Approximate Linear Programming

. Solution of projected

Φ

! (λ) equation

"

Φr = Π Tµ (Φr)

Slope Jµ

)λ=0

Simulation error

!

Π(Jµ )

=0λ=10

!

Simulation error Bias

"

Simulation error Solution of

Subspace M = {Φr | r ∈ ℜm }

Figure 4.9.1 Illustration of the bias-variance tradeoff in estimating the solution of the projected equation for different values of λ. As λ increases from λ = 0

∗ of the projected equation Φr = ΠT (λ) (Φr)

towards λ = 1, the solution Φrλ

∗ − ΠJ is the bias, and it approaches the projection ΠJµ . The difference Φrλ µ decreases to 0 as λ approaches 1, while the simulation error variance increases.

4.10 EXACT AND APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Another method for exact solution of infinite horizon DP problems is based on linear programming ideas. In particular, J * can be shown to be the unique optimal solution of a certain linear program. Focusing on α-discounted problems, the key idea is that J * is the “largest” (on a component-by-component basis) vector J that satisfies the constraint

J(i) ≤

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ(j) ,

for all i = 1, . . . , n and u ∈ U (i),

(4.81)

so that J * (1), . . . , J * (n) solve the linear program maximize

n

X

J(i)

i=1

(4.82)

subject to the constraint (4.81),

(see Fig. 4.10.1).

To verify this, let us use the

 VI algorithm to generate a sequence of vectors Jk = Jk (1),. . . , Jk (n) starting with an initial condition vector

J0 = J(1), . . . , J(n) such that

J0 (i) ≤ min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ0 (j) = J1 (i),

for all i.

J(2) =

J(2) = g(2, u2 ) + αp21 (u2 )J(1) + αp22 (u2 )J(2)

J(2) = g(2, u1 ) + αp21 (u1 )J(1) + αp22 (u1 )J(2)

!

"

J ∗ = J ∗ (1), J ∗ (2)

J(1) = g(1, u2 ) + αp11 (u2 )J(1) + αp12 (u2 )J(2)

J(1) = g(1, u1 ) + αp11 (u1 )J(1) + αp12 (u1 )J(2)

=0

J(1) =

Figure 4.10.1 A linear program associated with a two-state SSP problem. The constraint set is shaded, and the objective to maximize is J(1) + J(2). Note that because we have J(i) ≤ J ∗ (i) for all i and vectors J in theP constraint set, the n β J(i), where vector J ∗ maximizes any linear cost function of the form i=1 i βi ≥ 0 for all i. If βi > 0 for all i, then J ∗ is the unique optimal solution of the corresponding linear program.

This inequality can be used to show that

J0 (i) ≤ J1 (i) ≤ min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ1 (j) = J2 (i),

for all i,

and similarly

J(i) = J0 (i) ≤ Jk (i) ≤ Jk+1 (i),

for all i.

Since Jk (i) converges to J * (i) as k → ∞, it follows that we will also have

J(i) = J0 (i) ≤ J * (i),

for all i.

Thus out of all J satisfying the constraint (4.81), J * is the largest on a component-by-component basis.

Unfortunately, for large n the dimension of the linear program (4.82)

can be very large and its solution can be impractical, particularly in the absence of special structure. In this case, we may consider finding an approximation to J * , which can be used in turn to obtain a (suboptimal)

policy through approximation in value space.

One possibility is to approximate J * (i) with a linear feature-based architecture m

X

˜ r) =

J(i, rℓ φℓ (i), ℓ=1

Sec. 4.11

Approximation in Policy Space

where r = (r1 , . . . , rm ) is a vector of parameters, and for each state i, φℓ (i)

˜ r) in are some features. It is then possible to determine r by using J(i,

* place of J in the preceding linear programming approach. In particular, we compute r as the solution of the program maximize

X

˜ r)

J(i,

i∈I˜

˜ r) ≤ subject to J(i,

n

X i=1



˜ u ∈ Ũ (i), pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ˜(j, r) , i ∈ I,

where I˜ is either the state space I = {1, . . . , n} or a suitably chosen subset of I, and Ũ (i) is either U (i) or a suitably chosen subset of U (i). This is a

˜ r) is assumed linear in the parameter vector r.

linear program because J(i,

The major difficulty with this approximation approach is that while the dimension of r may be moderate, the number of constraints can be extremely large. It can be as large as nm, where n is the number of states and m is the maximum number of elements of the control constraint sets U (i).

Thus for a large problem it is essential to reduce drastically the number of constraints. Random sampling methods may be used to select a suitable subset of the constraints to enforce (perhaps using some known suboptimal policies), and progressively enrich the subset as necessary. With such constraint sampling schemes, the linear programming approach may be practical even for problems with a very large number of states. Its application, however, may require considerable sophistication, and a substantial amount of computation (see de Farias and Van Roy [DFV03], [DFV04],

[DeF04]).

We finally mention the possibility of using linear programming to evaluate approximately the cost function Jµ of a stationary policy µ in the context of approximate PI. The motivation for this is that the linear program to evaluate a given policy involves fewer constraints.

4.11 APPROXIMATION IN POLICY SPACE

We will now consider briefly an alternative to approximation in value space:

approximation within the space of policies. In particular, we parametrize stationary policies with a parameter vector r and denote them by µ̃(r), with components µ̃(i, r), i = 1, . . . , n. The parametrization may be featurebased and/or may involve a neural network. The idea is then to optimize some measure of performance with respect to the parameter r.

Note that it is possible for a suboptimal control scheme to employ both types of approximation: in policy space and in value space, with a distinct architecture for each case (examples of such schemes have been discussed briefly in Sections 2.1.5 and 4.7.3). When neural networks are

Production

Center

Delay

Retail

Storage

Demand

Figure 4.11.1. Illustration of a simple supply chain system.

used, this is known as the simultaneous use of a “policy network” (or “actor network”) and a “value network” (or “critic network”), each with its own set of parameters (see the following discussion on expert training).

Let us provide two examples where policy parametrizations are natural.

Example 4.11.1: (Supply chain parametrization)

There are many problems where the general structure of an optimal or nearoptimal policy is known through analysis or insight into the problem’s structure. An important case are supply chain systems involving production, inventory, and retail centers that are connected with transportation links. A simple example is illustrated in Fig. 4.11.1. Here a retail center places orders to the production center, depending on current stock. There may be orders in transit, and demand and delays can be stochastic. Such a problem can be formulated by DP but can be very difficult to solve exactly. However, intuitively, a near-optimal policy has a simple form: When the retail inventory goes below some critical level r1 , order an amount to bring the inventory to a target level r2 . Here a policy is specified by the parameter vector r = (r1 , r2 ), and can be trained by one of the methods of this section. This type of approach readily extends to the case of a complex network of production/retail centers, multiple products, etc.

Example 4.11.2: (Policy parametrization through cost parametrization)

In an important approach for parametrization of policies we start with a para˜ r). We then define a parametrization metric cost function approximation J(j, in policy policy through the one-step lookahead minimization µ̃(i, r) ∈ arg min

u∈U (i)

n

X j=1

pij (u) g(i, u, j) + J˜(j, r) ,



where J˜ is a function of a given form that depends on r. For example, J˜ may be a linear feature-based architecture, with features possibly obtained through a separately trained neural network. The policies µ̃(r) thus defined form a class of one-step lookahead policies parametrized by r. We may then determine r through some form of policy training method.

Sec. 4.11

Approximation in Policy Space

Uncertainty

Control

i u = µ̃(i, r) ˜

System

Environment

Cost

Current State i u

Controller

I, r) µ̃(·, r)

Figure 4.11.2 The optimization framework for approximation in policy space.

Here policies are parametrized with a parameter vector r and denoted by µ̃(r), with components µ̃(i, r), i = 1, . . . , n. Each parameter value r determines a policy µ(r), and a cost Jµ̃(r) (i0 ) for each initial state i0 , as indicated in the figure. The optimization approach determines r through the minimization



min E Jµ̃(r) (i0 ) , r

where the expected value above is taken with respect to a suitable probability distribution of i0 .

In what follows we will discuss briefly two training approaches for approximation in policy space.

4.11.1 Training by Cost Optimization - Policy Gradient and

Random Search Methods

According to the first approach, we parametrize the policies by the parameter vector r, and we optimize the corresponding expected cost over r. In particular, we determine r through the minimization

 min E Jµ̃(r) (i0 ) , r

(4.83)

where Jµ̃(r) (i0 ) is the cost of the policy µ̃(r) starting from the initial state i0 , and the expected value above is taken with respect to a suitable probability distribution of the initial state i0 (cf. Fig. 4.11.2). In the case where the initial state i0 is known and fixed, the method involves just minimization of

Jµ̃(r) (i0 ) over r, This simplifies a great deal the minimization, particularly when the problem is deterministic.

Gradient Methods for Cost Optimization

Let us first consider methods that perform the minimization (4.83) by using a gradient method, and for simplicity let us assume that the initial

condition i0 is known. Thus the problem is to minimize Jµ̃(r) (i0 ) over r by using the gradient method rk+1 = rk − γ k ∇Jµ̃(rk ) (i0 ),

k = 0, 1, . . . ,

(4.84)

assuming that Jµ̃(r) (i0 ) is differentiable with respect to r. Here γ k is a positive stepsize parameter, and ∇(·) denotes gradient with respect to r evaluated at the current iterate rk .

The difficulty with this method is that the gradient ∇Jµ̃(rk ) (i0 ) may not be explicitly available. In this case, the gradient must be approximated by finite differences of cost function values Jµ̃(rk ) (i0 ). Unfortunately, in the case of a stochastic problem, the cost function values may be computable only through Monte Carlo simulation. This may introduce a large amount of noise, so it is likely that many samples will need to be averaged in order to obtain sufficiently accurate gradients, thereby making the method inefficient. On the other hand, when the problem is deterministic, this difficulty does not appear, and the use of the gradient method (4.84) or other methods that do not rely on the use of gradients (such as coordinate descent) is facilitated.

There is extensive literature on alternative and more efficient policy gradient methods for stochastic problems, which are based on gradient approximations through sampling. A popular type of method is based on the use of randomized policies [i.e., policies that map a state i to a probability distribution over the set of controls U (i), rather than mapping onto a single control].† The method also uses a convenient gradient formula that involves the natural logarithm of the sampling distribution, and is known as the log-likelihood trick . We will next provide an outline of the ideas underlying this method.

Policy Gradient Methods for Randomized Policies

The detailed description and analysis of randomized policies and the associated policy gradient methods are beyond our scope. To get a sense of the general principle underlying this gradient-based approach, let us digress from the DP context of this chapter, and consider the generic optimization problem min F (z), z∈Z

† The AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs (Silver et al. [SHM16], [SHS17])

also use randomized policies, and a policy adjustment scheme that involves incremental changes along “directions of improvement.” However, these changes are implemented through the MCTS algorithm used by these programs, without the explicit use of a gradient (see the discussion in Section 2.4.2). Thus it may be said that the AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs involve a form of approximation in policy space (as well as approximation in value space), which bears resemblance but cannot be classified as a policy gradient method.

Sec. 4.11

Approximation in Policy Space

where Z is a subset of the m-dimensional space ℜm , and F is some realvalued function over ℜm .

We will take the unusual step of converting this problem to the stochastic optimization problem

 min Ep F (z) ,

(4.85)

p∈PZ

where z is viewed as a random variable, PZ is the set of probability distributions over Z, p denotes the generic distribution in PZ , and Ep {·} denotes expected value with respect to p. Of course this enlarges the search space from Z to PZ , but it allows the use of randomization schemes and simulation-based methods, even if the original problem is deterministic.

In a stochastic DP context, such as the SSP and discounted problems that we focused on in this chapter, the cost function is already stochastic, but to obtain a problem of the form (4.85), we must enlarge the set of policies to include randomized policies, mapping a state i into a probability distribution over the set of controls U (i).

Suppose now that we restrict attention to a subset P̃Z ⊂ PZ of probability distributions p(z; r) that are parametrized by some continuous parameter r, e.g., a vector in some m-dimensional space. In other words, we approximate the stochastic optimization problem (4.85) with the restricted problem

 min Ep(z;r) F (z) .

r

Then we may use a gradient method for solving this problem, such as





 k = 0, 1, . . . ,

(4.86)

rk+1 = rk − γ k ∇ Ep(z;rk ) F (z) ,

where ∇(·) denotes gradient with respect to r of the function in parentheses, evaluated at the current iterate rk .

A key fact here is that there is a useful formula for the gradient in

Eq. (4.86), which involves the gradient with respect to r of the natural

 logarithm log p(z; rk ) . Indeed, assuming for notational convenience that p(z; rk ) is a discrete distribution, we have

!




