X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ˜µ (j, r) ,

with some Q̃µ (i, u, r) possibly obtained with a policy approximation architecture (see the discussion of Section 2.1.3 on model-free approximation in policy space). Finally, once Q̃µ (i, u, r) is obtained with this approximation in policy space, the “improved” policy µ̃ is obtained from the minimization (5.27). The overall scheme can be viewed as model-free approximate

PI that is based on approximation in both value and policy space. In view of the two-fold approximation needed to obtain Q̃µ (i, u, r), this scheme is more complex, but allows trajectory reuse and thus deals better with the exploration issue.

5.3.4

Implementation Issues of Parametric Policy Iteration

Approximate PI in its various forms has been the subject of extensive research, both theoretical and applied. Let us provide a few comments, focusing on the preceding parametric PI schemes.

Sec. 5.3

Simulation-Based Policy Iteration

Architectural Issues and Cost Shaping

The choice of architectures for costs J˜µ (i, r) and Q-factors Q̃µ (i, u, r) is critical for the success of parametric approximation schemes. These architectures may involve the use of features, and they could be linear, or they could be nonlinear such as a neural network. A major advantage of a linear feature-based architecture is that the policy evaluations (5.22) and (5.26)

involve linear least squares problems, which admit a closed-form solution.

Moreover, when linear architectures are used, there is a broader variety of approximate policy evaluation methods with solid theoretical performance guarantees, such as TD(λ), LSTD(λ), and LSPE(λ), which will be summarized in Section 5.5, and are described in detail in several textbook sources.

Another interesting possibility for architecture choice has to do with cost shaping, which we discussed in Section 4.2. This possibility involves a modified cost per stage ĝ(i, u, j) = g(i, u, j) + V (j) − V (i),

i = 1, . . . , n,

for SSP problems, where V can be any approximation to J * . The corresponding formula for discounted problems is ĝ(i, u, j) = g(i, u, j) + αV (j) − V (i),

i = 1, . . . , n.

As noted in Section 4.2, cost shaping may change significantly the suboptimal policies produced by approximate DP methods and approximate

PI in particular. Generally, V should be chosen close (at least in terms of “shape”) to J * or to the current policy cost function Jµk , so that the difference J * − V or Jµk − V , respectively, can be approximated by an architecture that matches well the characteristics of the problem. It is possible to approximate either V or Jˆ with a parametric architecture or with a different approximation method, depending on the problem at hand.

Moreover, in the context of approximate PI, the choice of V may change from one policy evaluation to the next.

The literature referenced at the end of the chapter provide some applications of cost shaping. An interesting possibility is to use complementary approximations for V and for J * or Jµk . For example V may be approximated by a neural network-based approach that aims to discover the general form of J * or Jµk , and then a different method may be applied to provide a local correction to V in order to refine the approximation. In

Chapter 6 will also illustrate this idea within the context of aggregation.

Exploration Issues

Generating an appropriate training set at the policy evaluation step of approximate PI poses considerable challenges, and the literature contains

several related proposals. Let us discuss the generic issue of inadequate exploration, which we noted in Section 5.3.2 in connection with modelbased approximate PI.

We recall that in the PI variant of that section, to evaluate a policy µ, we determine the value of the parameter vector r by generating a large number of training pairs (is , β s ), s = 1, . . . , q, where β s is a sample cost corresponding to is and µ. We then use least squares training:

r ∈ arg min r

q

X s=1

2

J˜µ (is , r) − β s ,

[cf. Eq. (5.22)].

Each sample cost β s is generated by starting at is , simulating a trajectory of states and controls using µ and the known transition probabilities for some number Ns of stages, accumulating the corresponding discounted costs, and adding a terminal cost approximation

ˆ Ns ), αNs J(i where iNs is the terminal state of the Ns -stage trajectory and Jˆ is some initial guess of Jµ . In this context, we also discussed trajectory reuse, which aims at reducing the sampling effort, by using the tail portions of any generated trajectory.

Thus with trajectory reuse, we will be generating many cost or Qfactor samples that start from states frequently visited by µ, and this may bias the simulation by underrepresenting states that are unlikely to occur under µ. As a result, the cost estimates of these underrepresented states may be highly inaccurate, causing potentially serious errors in the calculation of the improved policy µ via the policy improvement operation.

One possibility to improve the exploration of the state space is to use a large number of initial states. It may then be necessary to use relatively short trajectories to keep the cost of the simulation low. To compensate for the short length of the trajectories it will then be important to introduce a terminal cost function approximation in the policy evaluation step in order to make the cost sample β s more accurate, as noted earlier. Moreover, when selecting the initial states of these trajectories, we should make sure that they are a representative sample of the portion of the state space most visited not just under the current policy and also under other policies.

A simple plausible scheme when evaluating policy µk , is to use randomization over a memory buffer , which stores candidate initial states. In particular, we may use a set of initial states that consists of the union of multiple subsets I, I0 , . . . , Ik−1 , where I is a starting set of initial states, and

I0 , . . . , Ik−1 are generated while evaluating the previous policies µ0 , . . . , µk−1 .

Each subset Im should consist of states generated while evaluating policy µm . We evaluate policy µk , by using short trajectories whose starting

Sec. 5.3

Simulation-Based Policy Iteration

states are chosen randomly from the subsets I, I0 , . . . , Ik−1 with probabilities that reflect a bias toward more recent policies (i.e., the probability of selecting an initial state from set Im should increase with m). At the same time, while evaluating policy µk , we should generate the subset of states Ik to use when training the next policy µk+1 . The initial subset I is special and should be carefully chosen so that it includes not only a subset of representative states, but also successor states under a variety of control choices.

Thus in the preceding scheme, all state transitions and associated transition costs used to generate the costs β s of the training set are generated by using the current policy µk . However, the set of initial states of the trajectories that are used to produce the cost samples is quite diverse:

it is obtained by randomization over the union of the starting set I and the set I0 ∪ · · · ∪ Ik−1 , which corresponds to states visited by all the preceding policies.

A potential weakness of the scheme just described is the need for a good terminal cost function approximation. Such a cost may not be easily available, particularly for SSP problems involving substantial “late costs;” for example when most of the cost is incurred upon reaching the destination. Such problems generally require “deep exploration,” i.e., long trajectories that reach or get close to the destination.

Exploration schemes like the one just described may also be used in the context of model-free variants of approximate PI for Q-factors; cf. Section 5.3.3. In fact, as we discussed in that section the need for exploration in the space of state-control pairs is more acute within that context. Again one may generate short trajectories that start with state-control pairs chosen randomly within a set of pairs that are representative of several policies to enhance exploration.

There have also been other related approaches to improve exploration, particularly in connection with the temporal difference methods to be discussed in Section 5.5. In some of these approaches, trajectories are generated through a mix of two policies: the policy being evaluated, sometimes called the target policy, to distinguish from the other policy, used with some probability at each stage, which is called behavior policy and is introduced to enhance exploration; see the end-of-chapter references. Also, methods that use a behavior policy are called off-policy methods, while methods that do not are called on-policy methods. A commonly suggested scheme is to use as off-policy one that is “ǫ-greedy,” i.e., that attains the minimum in the policy improvement phase within some threshold ǫ > 0, which is experimentally chosen. A variation of this scheme is to select off-policy controls by occasional randomization within the set of “ǫ-greedy” controls.

It is important to note, however, that using a behavior policy biases the cost samples towards that policy. Special modifications are needed to eliminate this source of bias (see [Ber12], Section 6.4.2). More importantly, even with a behavior policy, it may still be difficult to ensure that the

mixed on-and-off policy will induce sufficient exploration.

Generally, the area of efficient sampling, and the attendant issue of balancing exploration and the choice of promising controls (the so-called exploration-exploitation tradeoff) is a subject continuing research. For some recent work, see the paper by Russo and Van Roy [RuV16], the monograph [RVK18]. The paper by Osband, VanRoy, Russo, and Wen [OVR19]

develops special schemes to deal with issues of deep exploration.

5.3.5 Convergence Issues of Approximate Policy Iteration Oscillations

We will now consider the sequence of policies generated by approximate

PI. Contrary to exact PI, which is guaranteed to yield an optimal policy, in general approximate PI produces a sequence of policies, which are only guaranteed to lie asymptotically within a certain error bound from the optimal; cf. Prop. 5.1.4. Moreover, the generated policies may oscillate.

By this we mean that after a few iterations, policies tend to repeat in cycles.

This oscillation phenomenon, first described by the author in a 1996 conference [Ber96], occurs systematically in the absence of special conditions, for both optimistic and nonoptimistic PI methods. It can be observed even in very simple examples, as we will demonstrate shortly.

To describe a generic mechanism that may cause policy oscillations in approximate PI, we focus on the discounted problem, and we introduce the

˜ r), so called greedy partition. For a given approximation architecture J(·, this is a partition of the space ℜs of parameter vectors r into subsets Rµ , each subset corresponding to a stationary policy µ, and defined by †

or equivalently

Rµ =







r







˜ r) = T J(·,

˜ r)

Rµ = r | Tµ J(·,

µ(i) = arg min

u∈U(i)

n

X j=1







˜ r) , i = 1, . . . , n .

pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ(j,



Thus, Rµ is the set of parameter vectors r for which µ is “greedy” with

˜ r). Note that the greedy partition depends only on the aprespect to J(·,

˜ r) (which can be arbitrary, e.g., nonlinear), proximation architecture J(·, and does not depend on the method used for policy evaluation.

† Since we are now dealing with multiple policies, our notation reflects the dependence of the stage costs and transition probabilities on the control. Also Tµ is the Bellman equation mapping corresponding to a policy µ, while T is defined in terms of minimization of Tµ over µ.

Sec. 5.3

Simulation-Based Policy Iteration

Rµk+1 rµk

+2

rµk+3

Rµk

+1

+2

rµk+2

Rµk+3

k rµk+1

Rµk+2

Figure 5.3.3 Greedy partition and cycle of policies generated by nonoptimistic PI with cost function approximation. In particular, µ yields µ by policy improvement if and only if rµ ∈ Rµ . In this figure, the method cycles between four policies and the corresponding parameters rµk , rµk+1 , rµk+2 , rµk+3 .

We will first consider the nonoptimistic version of approximate PI;

a similar phenomenon occurs for optimistic PI, as we discuss later. For simplicity, let us assume that we use a policy evaluation method that for each given µ produces a unique parameter vector denoted rµ . The method starts with a policy µ0 and generates rµ0 by using the given policy evaluation method. It then finds a policy µ1 such that rµ0 ∈ Rµ1 .

It then repeats the process with µ1 replacing µ0 . If some policy µk satisfying rµk ∈ Rµk is encountered, the method keeps generating that policy. This is the necessary and sufficient condition for policy convergence in the nonoptimistic

PI method.

In the case of a lookup table representation where the parameter vector rµ is equal to the cost-to-go vector Jµ , the condition rµk ∈ Rµk is equivalent to rµk = T rµk , and is satisfied if and only if µk is optimal. When there is cost function approximation, however, this condition need not be satisfied for any policy. Since there is a finite number of possible vectors rµ , one generated from another in a deterministic way, the algorithm ends up repeating some cycle of policies µk , µk+1 , . . . , µk+m with rµk ∈ Rµk+1 , rµk+1 ∈ Rµk+2 , . . . , rµk+m−1 ∈ Rµk+m , rµk+m ∈ Rµk ;

(see Fig. 5.3.3). Furthermore, there may be several different cycles, and the method may end up converging to any one of them. The actual cycle obtained depends on the initial policy µ0 . This is similar to gradient

Rµ3

rµ2

rµ1

Rµ2

rµ3

Rµ1

Figure 5.3.4 Illustration of a trajectory of optimistic policy iteration with cost function approximation. The algorithm settles into an oscillation between policies µ1 , µ2 , µ3 with rµ1 ∈ Rµ2 ,

rµ2 ∈ Rµ3 ,

rµ3 ∈ Rµ1 .

The parameter vectors converge to the common boundary of Rµ1 , Rµ2 , Rµ3 .

methods applied to minimization of functions with multiple local minima, where the limit of convergence depends on the starting point.

Oscillations can in principle be particularly damaging, because there is no guarantee that the oscillating policies are “good” policies, and there is often no way to verify how well they perform relative to the optimal.

Section 6.4.2 of the book [BeT96] provides an argument suggesting that oscillations may not degrade significantly the approximate PI performance for many types of problems. Moreover, we note that oscillations can be avoided and approximate PI can be shown to converge under special conditions, which arise in particular when an aggregation approach is used;

see Chapter 6 and the approximate PI survey [Ber11a]. Also, when policies converge, there is a more favorable error bound, cf. Prop. 5.1.5.

Oscillations and Chattering in Optimistic PI Methods

We now consider policy oscillations when an optimistic variant of approximate policy evaluation methods is used. Then the trajectory of the method is less predictable and depends on the fine details of the iterative policy evaluation method, such as the frequency of the policy updates and the stepsize selection rule. Generally, given the current policy µ, optimistic PI will move towards the corresponding “target” parameter rµ , for as long as µ continues to be greedy with respect to the current cost-to-go approxima˜ r), that is, for as long as the current parameter vector r belongs tion J(·, to the set Rµ . Once, however, the parameter r crosses into another set, say

Rµ , the policy µ becomes greedy, and r changes course and starts moving

Sec. 5.3

Simulation-Based Policy Iteration

towards the new “target” rµ . Thus, the “targets” rµ of the method, and the corresponding policies µ and sets Rµ may keep changing, similar to nonoptimistic policy iteration. Simultaneously, the parameter vector r will move near the boundaries that separate the regions Rµ that the method visits, following reduced versions of the cycles that nonoptimistic PI may follow

(see Fig. 5.3.3). Furthermore, as Fig. 5.3.4 shows, if diminishing parameter changes are made between policy updates (such as for example when a diminishing stepsize is used by the policy evaluation method) and the method eventually cycles between several policies, the parameter vectors will tend to converge to the common boundary of the regions Rµ corresponding to these policies. This is the so-called chattering phenomenon for optimistic PI, whereby there is simultaneously oscillation in policy space and convergence in parameter space.

An additional insight is that the choice of the approximate policy evaluation method and exploration scheme does not seem crucial for the quality of the final policy obtained. Using a different method changes the targets rµ somewhat, but leaves the greedy partition unchanged. As a result, different methods “fish in the same waters” and tend to yield similar ultimate cycles of policies.

When chattering occurs, the limit of optimistic PI tends to be on a common boundary of several subsets of the greedy partition and may not meaningfully represent a cost approximation for any of the corresponding policies, as illustrated by the preceding example. Thus, the limit to which the method converges cannot always be used to construct an approximation of the cost-to-go of any policy or the optimal cost-to-go. As a result, at the end of optimistic PI and in contrast with the nonoptimistic version, one must go back and perform a screening process; that is, evaluate by simulation the many policies generated by the method starting from the initial conditions of interest and select the most promising one. This is a disadvantage of optimistic PI that may nullify whatever practical rate of convergence advantages it may have over its nonoptimistic counterpart.

We note, however, that computational experience indicates that for many problems, the cost functions of the different policies involved in chattering may not be “too different.” Indeed, suppose that we have convergence to a parameter vector r and that there is a steady-state policy oscillation involving a collection of policies M. Then, all the policies in M

˜ r), which implies that there is a subset of are greedy with respect to J(·, states i such that there are at least two different controls µ1 (i) and µ2 (i)

satisfying min

u∈U(i)

X j



˜ r)

pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ(j,

=

X j







˜ r)

pij µ1 (i) g i, µ1 (i), j + αJ(j,

=

X j







˜ r) .

pij µ2 (i) g i, µ2 (i), j + αJ(j,

Each equation of this type can be viewed as a constraining relation on the parameter vector r. Thus, excluding singular situations, there will be at most s relations of the preceding form holding, where s is the dimension of r. This implies that there will be at most s “ambiguous” states where

˜ r).

more than one control is greedy with respect to J(·,

Now assume that we have a problem where the total number of states is much larger than s, and in addition there are no “critical” states; that is, the cost consequences of changing a policy in just a small number of states

(say, of the order of s) is relatively small. It then follows that all policies in the set M involved in chattering have roughly the same cost. Furthermore, for the methods of this section, one may argue that the cost approximation

˜ rµ ) that would be generated

˜ r) is close to the cost approximation J(·,

J(·, for any of the policies µ ∈ M. Note, however, that the assumption of “no critical states,” aside from the fact that it may not be easily quantifiable, it will not be true for many problems.

5.4 Q-LEARNING

In this section we will discuss various Q-learning algorithms for discounted problems, which can be implemented in model-free fashion. The original method of this type is related to the VI algorithm for Q-factors, described in

Sections 4.2 and 4.3. Instead of approximating the cost functions of successive policies as in the PI method, it updates the Q-factors associated with an optimal policy, thereby avoiding the multiple policy evaluation steps of

PI. We will consider Q-learning as well as a variety of related methods with the shared characteristic that they involve exact or approximate Q-factors.

We first discuss the original form of Q-learning for discounted problems; the books [BeT96] and [Ber12] contain discussions of Q-learning for

SSP problems. Then we discuss PI algorithms for Q-factors, including optimistic asynchronous versions, which lead to algorithms with reduced overhead per iteration. Finally we focus on Q-learning algorithms with

Q-factor approximation.

In the discounted problem, the optimal Q-factors are defined for all pairs (i, u) with u ∈ U (i), by

Q* (i, u) =

n

X j=1

 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + αJ * (j) .

As discussed in Section 4.3, these Q-factors satisfy for all (i, u),



 n

X pij (u) g(i, u, j) + α min Q* (j, v) ,

Q* (i, u) = j=1

v∈U(j)

Sec. 5.4

Q-Learning

and are the unique solution of this set of equations. Moreover the optimal

Q-factors can be obtained by the VI algorithm Qk+1 = F Qk , where F is the operator defined by

(F Q)(i, u) =

n

X j=1



 pij (u) g(i, u, j) + α min Q(j, v) , v∈U(j)

for all (i, u).

(5.28)

It is straightforward to show that F is a contraction with modulus α, similar to the DP operator T . Thus the algorithm Qk+1 = F Qk converges to Q* from every starting point Q0 .

The original and most widely known Q-learning algorithm ([Wat89])

is a stochastic version of VI, whereby the expected value in Eq. (5.28) is suitably approximated by sampling and simulation. In particular, an infinitely long sequence of state-control pairs {(ik , uk )} is generated according to some probabilistic mechanism. For each pair (ik , uk ), a state jk is generated according to the probabilities pik j (uk ). Then the Q-factor of (ik , uk )

is updated using a stepsize γ k ∈ (0, 1] while all other Q-factors are left unchanged:

Qk+1 (i, u) = (1 − γ k )Qk (i, u) + γ k (Fk Qk )(i, u),

for all (i, u), (5.29)

where



g(ik , uk , jk ) + α minv∈U(jk ) Qk (jk , v) if (i, u) = (ik , uk ),

Qk (i, u)

if (i, u) 6= (ik , uk ).

(5.30)

Note that (Fk Qk )(ik , uk ) is a single sample approximation of the expected value defining (F Qk )(ik , uk ) in Eq. (5.28).

To guarantee the convergence of the algorithm (5.29)-(5.30) to the optimal Q-factors, some conditions must be satisfied. Chief among these are that all state-control pairs (i, u) must be generated infinitely often within the infinitely long sequence {(ik , uk )}, and that the successor states j must be independently sampled at each occurrence of a given state-control pair. Furthermore, the stepsize γ k should satisfy the conditions

(Fk Qk )(i, u) =

γ k > 0, for all k,

∞

X

k=0

γ k = ∞,

∞

X

(γ k )2 < ∞,

k=0

which are typical of stochastic approximation methods (see e.g, the books

[BeT96], [Ber12], Section 6.1.4), as for example when γ k = c1 /(k + c2 ), where c1 and c2 are some positive constants. In addition some other technical conditions should hold. A mathematically rigorous convergence proof was given in the paper [Tsi94], which embeds Q-learning within a broad class of asynchronous stochastic approximation algorithms. This proof

(also reproduced in [BeT96]) combines the theory of stochastic approximation algorithms with the convergence theory of asynchronous DP and asynchronous iterative methods; cf. the papers [Ber82], [Ber83], and the book [BeT89].

In practice, Q-learning has some drawbacks, the most important of which is that the number of Q-factors/state-control pairs (i, u) may be excessive. To alleviate this difficulty, we may introduce a Q-factor approximation architecture. One of these possibilities will be discussed next.

5.4.1 Optimistic Policy Iteration with Parametric Q-Factor

Approximation - SARSA and DQN

We have discussed so far Q-learning algorithms with an exact representation of Q-factors. We will now consider Q-learning with Q-factor approximation. As we noted earlier, we may view Q-factors as optimal costs of a certain discounted DP problem, whose states are the state-control pairs

(i, u) in addition to the original states. We may thus apply the approximate

PI methods discussed earlier. For this, we need to introduce a parametric architecture Q̃(i, u, r). This architecture could be linear feature-based, or nonlinear such as one that uses a neural network.

We have already discussed in Section 4.7.3 a model-free approximate

PI method that is based on Q-factors and least squares training/regression.

There are also optimistic approximate PI methods, which use a policy for a limited number of stages with cost function approximation for the remaining states, and/or a few samples in between policy updates.

As an example, let us consider an extreme version that uses a single sample between policy updates. At the start of iteration k, we have the current parameter vector rk , we are at some state ik , and we have chosen a control uk . Then:

(1) We simulate the next transition (ik , ik+1 ) using the transition probabilities pik j (uk ).

(2) We generate the control uk+1 with the minimization uk+1 ∈ arg

min

u∈U(ik+1 )

Q̃(ik+1 , u, rk ).

[In some schemes, uk+1 is chosen with a small probability to be a random element of U (ik+1 ) or one that attains within some ǫ the minimum above, in order to enhance exploration.]

(3) We update the parameter vector via rk+1 = rk − γ k ∇Q̃(ik , uk , rk )qk , where γ k is a positive stepsize, ∇(·) denotes gradient with respect to r evaluated at the current parameter vector rk , and the scalar qk is

Sec. 5.5

Additional Methods - Temporal Differences

given by qk = Q̃(ik , uk , rk ) − αQ̃(ik+1 , uk+1 , rk ) − g(ik , uk , ik+1 ).

The vector ∇Q̃(ik , uk , rk )qk can be interpreted as an approximate gradient direction at rk based on an underlying regression procedure.

The scalar qk is related to the notion of a temporal difference, which will be discussed in Section 5.5.

The process is now repeated with rk+1 , ik+1 , and uk+1 replacing rk , ik , and uk , respectively. Note that the simulated state-control pairs (ik , uk )

and associated next transition (ik , ik+1 ) using the transition probabilities pik j (uk ), which are generated in Step (1) above, can be reused judiciously over time, in order to save in simulation overhead.

Extreme optimistic schemes of the type just described have been used in practice, and are often referred to as SARSA (State-Action-RewardState-Action); see e.g., the books [BeT96], [BBD10], [SuB18]. When Qfactor approximation is used, their behavior is very complex, their theoretical convergence properties are unclear, and there are no associated performance bounds in the literature. The method is more commonly used in a less extreme/optimistic form, whereby several (perhaps many)

state-control-transition cost-next state samples are collected and suitably averaged before updating the vector rk .

Other variants of the method attempt to save in sampling effort by storing the generated samples in a buffer and reusing them in some randomized fashion in subsequent iterations (cf. our discussion of exploration in Section 5.3.4). This is also called sometimes experience replay, an idea that has been been used since the early days of RL, both to save in sampling effort and to enhance exploration. The DQN (Deep Q Network) scheme, championed by DeepMind, is based on this idea (the term “Deep” is a reference to DeepMind’s affinity for deep neural networks, but experience replay does not depend on the use of a deep neural network architecture).

5.5 ADDITIONAL METHODS - TEMPORAL DIFFERENCES

In this section, we summarize a few additional methods for approximation in value space in infinite horizon problems. These include the simulationbased temporal difference methods for policy evaluation with a linear parametric architecture, whose primary aim is to address a bias-variance tradeoff similar to the one discussed in Section 5.3.2. Our presentation is brief, somewhat abstract, and makes use of linear algebra mathematics. It may be skipped without loss of continuity. This is only a summary; it is meant to provide a connection to other material in this chapter, and orientation for further reading into both the optimization and artificial intelligence literature on the subject.

Approximate Policy Evaluation Using Projections

Our main concern in policy evaluation is to solve approximately the Bellman equation corresponding to a given policy µ. Thus, for discounted problems, we are interested in solving the linear system of equations

Jµ (i) =

n

X i=1





 pij µ(i) g i, µ(i), j + αJµ (j) ,

i = 1, . . . , n,

or in shorthand,

Jµ = T µ Jµ ,

(5.31)

where Tµ is the DP operator for µ, given by

(Tµ J)(i) =

n

X i=1





 pij µ(i) g i, µ(i), j + αJ(j) ,

i = 1, . . . , n. (5.32)

Let us consider the approximate solution of this equation by parametric approximation (cf. Section 4.7). This amounts to replacing Jµ with some vector that lies within the manifold represented by the approximation architecture n o



˜ r), . . . , J(n,

˜ r) all parameter vectors r .

M = J(1,

(5.33)

The approximate solution of systems of equations within an approximation manifold of the form (5.33) has a long history in scientific computation, particularly when the manifold is linear. A central approach involves the use of projections with respect to a weighted quadratic norm kJk2 =

n

X i=1

2 ξi J(i) ,

(5.34)

where J(i) are the components of the vector J and ξi are some positive weights. The projection of a vector J onto the manifold M is denoted by

Π(J). Thus

Π(J) ∈ arg min kJ − V k2 .

(5.35)

V ∈M

Note that for a nonlinear parametric architecture, such as a neural network, the projection may not exist and may not be unique. However, in the case of a linear architecture, where the approximation manifold M is a subspace, the projection does exist and is unique; this is a consequence of the fundamental orthogonal projection theorem of calculus and real analysis.

Let us consider three general approaches for approximation of Jµ .

(a) Project Jµ onto M to obtain Π(Jµ ), which is used as an approximation of Jµ .
