Sec. 2.0

approximated by a function J˜k+ℓ . For example, in two-step lookahead the function J˜k+1 is given by n

J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) = min

E gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 )

uk+1 ∈Uk+1 (xk+1 )

o

+ J˜k+2 fk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 ) ,

* .

where J˜k+2 is some approximation of the optimal cost-to-go function Jk+2

Actually, as the preceding two-step lookahead case illustrates, one may view ℓ-step lookahead as the special case of one-step lookahead where the lookahead function is the optimal cost function of an (ℓ − 1)-stage DP problem with a terminal cost at the end of the ℓ−1 stages, which is equal to

J˜k+ℓ . However, it is often important to discuss ℓ-step lookahead separately, in order to address special implementation issues that do not arise in the context of one-step lookahead.

In our initial discussion of approximation in value space of Section 2.1, we will focus on one-step lookahead. There are straightforward extensions of the main ideas to the multistep context, which we will discuss in Section

2.2.

Approximation in Policy Space

The major alternative to approximation in value space is approximation in policy space, whereby we select the policy by using optimization over a suitably restricted class of policies, usually a parametric family of some form.

An important advantage of this approach is that the computation of controls during on-line operation of the system is often much easier compared with the minimization (2.1). However, this advantage can also be gained by combining approximation in value space with policy approximation in a two-stage scheme:

(a) Obtain the approximately optimal cost-to-go functions J˜k , thereby defining a corresponding suboptimal policy µ̃k , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, via the one-step lookahead minimization (2.1).

(b) Approximate µ̃k , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, using a training set consisting of a large number q of sample pairs xsk , usk , s = 1, . . . , q, where usk = µ̃k (xsk ). For example, introduce a parametric family of policies µk (xk , rk ), k = 0, . . . , N − 1, of some form, where rk is a parameter, such as a family represented by a neural net, and then estimate the parameters rk using some form of regression, e.g., rk ∈ arg min r

q

X

usk − µk (xsk , r)

.

s=1

In this chapter we discuss primarily approximation in value space, although some of the ideas are also relevant to approximation in policy space.

We focus on finite horizon problems, postponing the discussion of infinite horizon problems for Chapter 4 and later. However, the finite horizon ideas are relevant to the infinite horizon setting, and many of the methods of the present chapter and Chapter 3 also apply with small modifications to infinite horizon problems.

Model-Based Versus Model-Free Implementation

An important attribute of the solution process is whether an analytical model or Monte Carlo simulation is used to compute expected values such as those arising in one-step and multistep lookahead expressions. We distinguish between two cases:

(a) In the model-based case, we assume that the conditional probability distribution of wk , given (xk , uk ), is available in essentially closed form. By this we mean that the value of pk (wk | xk , uk ) is available for any triplet (xk , uk , wk ). Moreover, the functions gk and fk are also available. In a model-based solution process, expected values, such as the one in the lookahead expression of Eq. (2.1), are obtained with algebraic calculations as opposed to Monte Carlo simulation.

(b) In the model-free case, the calculation of the expected value in the expression of Eq. (2.1), and other related expressions, is done with

Monte Carlo simulation. There may be two reasons for this.

(1) A mathematical model of the probabilities pk (wk | xk , uk ) is not available, but instead there is a computer program/simulator that for any given state xk and control uk , simulates sample probabilistic transitions to a successor state xk+1 , and generates the corresponding transition costs. In this case the expected value can be computed approximately by Monte Carlo simulation.†

(2) The probabilities pk (wk | xk , uk ) are available for any triplet

(xk , uk , wk ), but for reasons of computational efficiency we prefer to compute the expected value in the expression (2.1) by using sampling and Monte Carlo simulation. Thus the expected value is computed as in the case where there is no mathematical model, but instead there is a computer simulator.‡

† The term Monte Carlo simulation mostly refers to the use of a software simulator. However, a hardware or a combined hardware/software simulator may also be used in some practical situations to generate samples that are used for Monte Carlo averaging.

‡ The idea of using Monte Carlo simulation to compute complicated integrals or even sums of many numbers is used widely in various types of numerical computations. It encompasses efficient Monte Carlo techniques known as Monte Carlo

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

Approximate Min Approximate

Parametric approximation Neural nets Discretization

Steps “Future” First Step Steps “Future”

!

"

min E gk (xk , uk , wk )+J˜k+1 (xk+1 )

uk

{·} Approximate Cost-to-Go J˜k+1

Approximate

Min choices

Approximate

E{·} approximation Problem approximation

Simple

Parametric

Model Predictive Control

Certainty equivalence Monte CarloRollout, tree search choices Tree

Parametric

Aggregation Adaptive simulationSimple

Monte-Carlo

Search approximation Problem approximation

Parametric approximation Neural nets

Certainty equivalence Monte Carlo tree search

Aggregation

Figure 2.1.1 Schematic illustration of various options for approximation in value space with one-step lookahead. The lookahead function values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) ap∗ proximate the optimal cost-to-go values Jk+1

(xk+1 ), and can be computed by a variety of methods. There may be additional approximations in the minimization over uk and in the computation of the expected value over wk ; see Section 2.1.1.

In summary, the use of sampling and Monte Carlo simulation is the defining attribute for a method to be model-based or model-free in the terminology of this book . In particular, a model-free method is one that can be applied both when there is a mathematical model and when there is not. This view of a model-free approach aims to avoid ambiguities in cases where a model is available, but a model-free method is used anyway for reasons of convenience or computational efficiency.

Note that for deterministic problems there is no expected value to compute, so these problems typically come under the model-based category, even if values of the functions gk and fk become available through complicated computer calculations. Still however, Monte Carlo simulation may enter the solution process of a deterministic problem for a variety of reasons. For example the games of chess and Go are perfectly deterministic, but the AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs (Silver et al. [SHM16], [SHS17])

use randomized policies and rely heavily on Monte Carlo tree search techniques, which will be discussed later in Section 2.4. The same is true for some policy gradient methods, which will be discussed in Chapter 4.

2.1 GENERAL ISSUES OF APPROXIMATION IN VALUE SPACE

There are two major issues in a value space approximation scheme, and each of the two can be considered separately from the other:

(1) Obtaining J˜k , i.e., the method to compute the lookahead functions

J˜k that are involved in the lookahead minimization (2.1). There are integration and importance sampling; see textbooks such as [Liu01], [AsG10],

[RoC10] for detailed developments.

quite a few approaches here (see Fig. 2.1.1). Several of them are discussed in this chapter, and more will be discussed in subsequent chapters.

(2) Control selection, i.e., the method to perform the minimization (2.1)

and implement the suboptimal policy µ̃k . Again there are several exact and approximate methods for control selection, some of which will be discussed in this chapter (see Fig. 2.1.1).

In this section we will provide a high level discussion of these issues.

2.1.1 Methods for Computing Approximations in Value Space

Regarding the computation of J˜k , we will consider four types of methods:

(a) Problem approximation (Section 2.3): Here the functions J˜k in Eq.

(2.1) are obtained as the optimal or nearly optimal cost functions of a simplified optimization problem, which is more convenient for computation. Simplifications may include, exploiting decomposable structure, ignoring various types of uncertainties, and reducing the size of the state space. The latter form of simplification is known as aggregation, and is discussed separately in Chapter 5.

(b) On-line approximate optimization (Section 2.4): These methods often involve the use of a suboptimal policy or heuristic, which is applied on-line when needed to approximate the true optimal cost-to-go values. The suboptimal policy may be obtained by any other method, e.g., problem approximation. Rollout algorithms and model predictive control are prime examples of these methods.

(c) Parametric cost approximation (Chapter 3): Here the functions J˜k in Eq. (2.1) are obtained from a given parametric class of functions

J˜k (xk , rk ), where rk is a parameter vector, selected by a suitable algorithm. The parametric class is typically obtained by using prominent characteristics of xk called features, which can be obtained either through insight into the problem at hand, or by using training data and some form of neural network.

(d) Aggregation (Chapter 5): This is a special but rather sophisticated form of problem approximation. A simple example is to select a set of representative states for each stage, restrict the DP algorithm to these states only, and approximate the costs-to-go of other states by interpolation between the optimal costs-to-go of the representative states. In another example of aggregation, the state space is divided into subsets, and each subset is viewed as a state of an “aggregate DP problem.” The functions J˜k are then derived from the optimal cost functions of the aggregate problem. The state space partition can be arbitrary, but is often determined by using features (states with “similar” features are grouped together). Moreover, aggregation can be

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

combined in complementary fashion with the methods (a)-(c) above, and can use as a starting point an approximate cost-to-go function produced by any one of these methods; e.g., apply a parametric approximation method and enhance the resulting cost function through local corrections obtained by aggregation.

Additional variations of the above methods are obtained when used in combination with approximate minimization over uk in Eq. (2.1), and also when the expected value over wk is computed approximately via a certainty equivalence approximation (cf. Section 2.3.2) or adaptive simulation and

Monte Carlo tree search (Sections 2.1.2 and 2.4.2).

2.1.2

Off-Line and On-Line Methods

In approximation in value space an important consideration is whether the cost-to-go functions J˜k+1 and the suboptimal control functions µ̃k , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, of Eq. (2.1) are computed off-line (i.e., before the control process begins, and for all xk and k), or on-line (i.e., after the control process begins, when needed, and for just the states xk to be encountered).

Usually, for challenging problems, the controls µ̃k (xk ) are computed on-line, since their storage may be difficult for a large state space. However, the on-line or off-line computation of J˜k+1 is an important design choice.

We thus distinguish between:

(i) Off-line methods, where the entire function J˜k+1 in Eq. (2.1) is computed for every k, before the control process begins. The values

J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) are either stored in memory or can be obtained with a simple and fast computation, as needed in order to compute controls by one-step lookahead. The advantage of this is that most of the computation is done off-line, before the first control is applied at time

0. Once the control process starts, no extra computation is needed to obtain J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) for implementing the corresponding suboptimal policy.

(ii) On-line methods, where most of the computation is performed just after the current state xk becomes known, the values J˜k (xk+1 ) are computed only at the relevant next states xk+1 , and are used to compute the control to be applied via Eq. (2.1). These methods require the computation of a control only for the N states actually encountered in the control process. In contrast with the off-line approximation methods, these methods are well-suited for on-line replanning, whereby the problem data may change over time.

Examples of typically off-line schemes are neural network and other parametric approximations, as well as aggregation. Examples of typically online schemes are rollout and model predictive control. Schemes based on problem approximation may be either on-line or off-line depending on other

problem-related factors. Of course there are also problem-dependent hybrid methods, where significant computation is done off-line to expedite the on-line computation of needed values of J˜k+1 .

2.1.3 Model-Based Simplification of the Lookahead Minimization

We will now consider ways to facilitate the calculation of the suboptimal control µ̃k (xk ) at state xk via the minimization of the one-step lookahead expression n

o

(2.2)

E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

once the cost-to-go approximating functions J˜k+1 have been selected. In this section, we will assume that we have a mathematical model, i.e., that the functions gk and fk are available in essentially closed form, and that the conditional probability distribution of wk , given (xk , uk ), is also available.

In particular, Monte Carlo simulation is not used to compute the expected value in Eq. (2.2). We will address the model-free case in the next section.

Important issues here are the computation of the expected value (if the problem is stochastic) and the minimization over uk ∈ Uk (xk ) in Eq.

(2.2). Both of these operations may involve substantial work, which is of particular concern when the minimization is to be performed on-line.

One possibility to eliminate the expected value from the expression

(2.2) is (assumed) certainty equivalence. Here we choose a typical value w̃k of wk , and use the control µ̃k (xk ) that solves the deterministic problem h

i

(2.3)

gk (xk , uk , w̃k ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , w̃k ) .

min uk ∈Uk (xk )

The approach of turning a stochastic problem into a deterministic one by replacing uncertain quantities with single typical values highlights the possibility that J˜k may itself be obtained by using deterministic methods.

We will discuss this approach and its variations in greater detail later in this chapter (see Section 2.3).

Let us now consider the issue of algorithmic minimization over Uk (xk )

in Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3). If Uk (xk ) is a finite set, the minimization can be done by brute force, through exhaustive computation and comparison of the relevant cost expressions. This of course can be very time consuming, particularly for multistep lookahead, but parallel computation can be used with great effect for this purpose [as well as for the calculation of the expected value in the expression (2.2)]. For some discrete control problems, integer programming techniques may also be used. Moreover, for deterministic problems with multistep lookahead, sophisticated exact or approximate shortest path methods may be considered; several methods of this type are available, such as label correcting methods, A∗ methods, and their variants (see the author’s books [Ber98] and [Ber17] for detailed accounts, which are consistent with the context of this chapter).

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

When the control constraint set is infinite, it may be replaced by a finite set through discretization. However, a more efficient alternative may be to use continuous space nonlinear programming techniques. This possibility can be attractive for deterministic problems, which lend themselves better to continuous space optimization; an example is the model predictive control context (see Section 2.5).

For stochastic problems and either one-step or multistep lookahead and continuous control spaces, the methodology of stochastic programming, which bears a close connection with linear and nonlinear programming methods, may be useful. We refer to the textbook [Ber17] for a discussion of its application to the approximate DP context, and references to the relevant literature. Still another possibility to simplify the one-step lookahead minimization (2.2) is based on Q-factor approximation, which is also suitable for model-free policy implementation, as we discuss next.

2.1.4

Model-Free Q-Factor Approximation in Value Space

One of the major aims of this book is to address stochastic model-free situations, i.e., methods where a mathematical model [the system functions fk , the probability distribution of wk , and the one-stage cost functions gk ]

is not used because it is either hard to construct, or simply inconvenient.

We assume instead that the system and cost structure can be simulated in software far more easily (think, for example, control of a queueing network with complicated but well-defined service disciplines at the queues).†

In this section, we will review some of the high-level ideas of passing from model-based to model-free policy implementations for stochastic problems. In particular, we assume that:

(a) There is a computer program/simulator that for any given state xk and control uk , simulates sample probabilistic transitions to a successor state xk+1 , and generates the corresponding transition costs.

(b) A cost function approximation J˜k+1 is available. Approaches to obtain J˜k+1 in model-free fashion will be discussed in the context of specific methods later. For example J˜k+1 may be obtained by solving a simpler problem for which a model is available, or it may be separately obtained without a mathematical model, by using a simulator.

We want to use the functions J˜k+1 and the simulator to compute or approximate the Q-factors n

o

E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

(2.4)

for all uk ∈ Uk (xk ), and then find the minimal Q-factor and corresponding one-step lookahead control.

† Another possibility is to use the real system to provide the next state and transition cost, but we will not deal explicitly with this case in this book.

Given a state xk , we may use the simulator to compute these Q-factors for all the pairs (xk , uk ), uk ∈ Uk (xk ), and then select the minimizing control. However, in many cases this can be very time-consuming. To deal with this difficulty, we may introduce a parametric family/approximation architecture of Q-factor functions, Q̃k (xk , uk , rk ), where rk is the parameter vector and use a least squares fit/regression to approximate the expected value that is minimized in Eq. (2.2). One possibility is to use a neural network parametric architecture; see Chapter 3, where we will discuss methods for selecting and training parametric architectures. The steps are as follows:

Summary of Q-Factor Approximation Based on Approximation in Value Space

Assume that the value of J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) is available for any given xk+1 :

(a) Use the simulator to collect a large number of “representative” sample state-control-successor states-stage cost quadruplets

(xsk , usk , xsk+1 , gks ), and corresponding sample Q-factors βks = gks + J˜k+1 (xsk+1 ),

s = 1, . . . , q.

(2.5)

Here xsk+1 is the simulator’s output of the next state xsk+1 = fk (xsk , usk , wks )

that corresponds to some disturbance wks . This disturbance also determines the one-stage-cost sample gks = gk (xsk , usk , wks ).

The simulator need not output wks ; only the sample next state xsk+1 and sample cost gks are needed (see Fig. 2.1.2).

(b) Determine the parameter vector r̄k by the least-squares regression q

X

2

(2.6)

r̄k ∈ arg min

Q̃k (xsk , usk , rk ) − βks .

rk

s=1

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

Sample State

Sample State

Sample Next State xsk+1

Sample State xsk

Sample

s k Simulator

State

Sample Control usk

) J˜k+1

Sample Q-Factor

SampleSample

State Q-Factor βks = gks + J˜k+1 (xsk+1 )

Sample Transition Cost gks

Figure 2.1.2 Schematic illustration of the simulator used for a model-free Qfactor approximation, assuming approximate cost functions J˜k+1 are known. The input to the simulator are sample state-control pairs (xsk , usk ), and the outputs are a next state sample xsk+1 and cost sample gks . These correspond to a disturbance wks according to xsk+1 = fk (xsk , usk , wks ),

gks = gk (xsk , usk , wks ).

The actual value of wks need not be output by the simulator. The sample Qfactors βks are generated according to Eq. (2.5), and are used in the least squares regression (2.6) to yield a parametric Q-factor approximation Q̃k and the policy implementation (2.7).

(c) Use the policy µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk , r̄k ).

(2.7)

Note some important points about the preceding procedure:

(1) It is model-free in the sense that it is based on Monte Carlo simulation. Moreover, it does not need the functions fk and gk , and the probability distribution of wk to generate the policy µ̃k through the least squares regression (2.6) and the Q-factor minimization (2.7).

The simulator to collect the samples (2.5) and the cost function approximation J˜k+1 suffice.

(2) Two approximations are potentially required: One to compute J˜k+1 , which is needed for the samples βks [cf. Eq. (2.5)], and another to compute Q̃k through the regression (2.6). The approximation methods to obtain J˜k+1 and Q̃k may be unrelated.

(3) The policy µ̃k obtained through the minimization (2.7) is not the same as the one obtained through the minimization (2.2). There are two reasons for this. One is the approximation error introduced by the Q-factor architecture Q̃k , and the other is the simulation error introduced by the finite-sample regression (2.6). We have to accept these sources of error as the price to pay for the convenience of not requiring a mathematical model for policy implementation.

Let us also mention a variant of the least squares minimization in

Eq. (2.6), which is to use a regularized minimization where a quadratic regularization term is added to the least squares objective. This term is a multiple of the squared deviation kr − r̂k2 of r from some initial guess r̂. Moreover, in some cases, a nonquadratic minimization may be used in place of Eq. (2.6) to determine r̄k , but in this book we will focus on least squares exclusively.

2.1.5 Approximation in Policy Space on Top of Approximation in Value Space

A common approach for approximation in policy space, is to introduce a parametric family of policies µ̃k (xk , rk ), where rk is a parameter vector.

The parametrization may involve a neural network as we will discuss in

Chapter 3. Alternatively, the parametrization may involve problem-specific features, exploiting the special structure of the problem at hand.

A general scheme for parametric approximation in policy space is to obtain a large number of sample state-control pairs (xsk , usk ), s = 1, . . . , q, such that for each s, usk is a “good” control at state xsk . We can then choose the parameter rk by solving the least squares/regression problem min rk

q

X

usk − µ̃k (xsk , rk )

(2.8)

s=1

(possibly with added regularization). In particular, we may determine usk using a human or a software “expert” that can choose “near-optimal” controls at given states, so µ̃k is trained to match the behavior of the expert.

Methods of this type are commonly referred to as supervised learning in artificial intelligence (see also the discussion in Section 4.11).

A special case of the above procedure, which connects with approximation in value space, is to generate the sample state-control pairs (xsk , usk )

through a one-step lookahead minimization of the form usk ∈ arg

min

u∈Uk (xk )

n

o

E gk (xsk , u, wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xsk , u, wk ) ,

(2.9)

where J˜k+1 is a suitable (separately obtained) approximation in value space; cf. Eq. (2.2), or an approximate Q-factor based minimization usk ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xs

)

k

Q̃k (xsk , uk , r̄k ),

(2.10)

[cf. Eq. (2.7)]. In this case, we collect the sample state-control pairs

(xsk , usk ), s = 1, . . . , q, by using approximation in value space through Eq.

(2.9) or Eq. (2.10), and then apply approximation in policy space through

Sec. 2.1

General Issues of Approximation in Value Space

Eq. (2.8) (i.e., approximation in policy space is built on top of approximation in value space).

A major advantage of schemes based on the minimization (2.8) is that once the parametrized policy is obtained, the on-line implementation of the policy is fast and does not involve extensive calculations such as minimizations of the form (2.9) or (2.10). This advantage is generally shared by schemes that are based on approximation in policy space.

2.1.6

When is Approximation in Value Space Effective?

An important question is what constitutes good approximating functions

J˜k in a one-step lookahead scheme. An answer that suggests itself is that

J˜k should be “close” to the optimal cost-to-go function Jk* for all k. This guarantees a certain degree of quality of the approximation scheme, but is neither necessary nor is it satisfied by all or even most good practical schemes.

For example if the approximating values J˜k (xk ) differ from the optimal values Jk* (xk ) uniformly by the same constant, the policy obtained by the approximation in value space scheme is optimal. This suggests that a better condition might be that relative values of J˜k and Jk* should be

“close” to each other, i.e.,

J˜k (xk ) − J˜k+ℓ (x′k ) ≈ Jk* (xk ) − Jk* (x′k ), for all pairs of states xk and x′k . Still, however, this guideline neglects the role of the first stage cost (or the cost of the first ℓ stages in the case of ℓ-step lookahead).

A more accurate predictor of good quality of the suboptimal policy obtained is that the Q-factor approximation error Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u)

changes gradually as u changes, where Qk and Q̃k denote the exactly optimal Q-factor and its approximation, respectively. For a heuristic explanation, suppose that approximation in value space generates a control ũk at a state xk where another control uk is optimal. Then we have

Q̃k (xk , uk ) − Q̃k (xk , ũk ) ≥ 0,

(2.11)

since ũk minimizes Q̃k (xk , ·), and

Qk (xk , ũk ) − Qk (xk , uk ) ≥ 0,

(2.12)

since uk minimizes Qk (xk , ·). If ũk is far from optimal, the Q-factor difference in Eq. (2.12) will be large, and by adding Eq. (2.11), it follows that the expression





Qk (xk , ũk ) − Q̃k (xk , ũk ) − Qk (xk , uk ) − Q̃k (xk , uk )

!

"

!

∈

"

Good approximation Poor Approximation

Good approximation Poor Approximation

) Qk (xk , u)

) Qk (xk , u)

Q̃k (xk , u)

Q̃k (xk , u)

ũk

) uk

u

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u)

ũk ) uk

u

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u)

Figure 2.1.3 Schematic illustration of the “slope” of the Q-factor approximation error as a predictor of quality of an approximation in value space scheme. At a given state xk , let uk be optimal, so that it minimizes Qk (xk , u) over u ∈ Uk (xk ), and let ũk be generated by approximation in value space, so that it minimizes

Q̃k (xk , u) over u ∈ Uk (xk ). In the figure on the right the approximation error

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u) changes gradually (i.e., has small “slope”), and ũk is a good choice, because Qk (xk , ũk ) is close the optimal Qk (xk , uk ). In the figure on the left the approximation error Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u) changes fast (i.e., has large “slope”), and ũk is a poor choice. In the extreme case where the Q-factors

Qk (xk , u) and Q̃k (xk , u) differ by a constant, minimization of either one of them yields the same result.

will be even larger. This is not likely to happen if the approximation error

Qk (xk , u) − Q̃k (xk , u) changes gradually (i.e., has small “slope”) for u in a neighborhood that includes uk and ũk (cf. Fig. 2.1.3). In many practical settings, as u changes, the corresponding changes in the approximate Qfactors Q̃k (xk , u) tend to have “similar” form to the changes in the exact Qfactors Qk (xk , u), thus providing some explanation for the observed success of approximation in value space in practice.

Of course, one would like to have quantitative tests to check the quality of either the approximate cost functions J˜k and Q-factors Q̃k , or the suboptimal policies obtained. However, general tests of this type are not available, and it is often hard to assess how a particular suboptimal policy compares to the optimal, except on a heuristic, problem-dependent basis. Unfortunately, this is a recurring difficulty in approximate DP/RL.

2.2 MULTISTEP LOOKAHEAD

The approximation in value space scheme that we have discussed so far is known as one-step lookahead, since it involves solving a one-step minimization problem at each time k [cf. Eq. (2.1)]. A more ambitious, but also computationally more intensive scheme is multistep lookahead .

As an example, in two-step lookahead we apply at time k and state xk , the control µ̃k (xk ) attaining the minimum in Eq. (2.1), where now

Sec. 2.2

Multistep Lookahead

At State xk

DP minimization

First ℓ Steps “Future”

min

uk ,µk+1 ,...,µk+ℓ−1

E

!

gk (xk , uk , wk ) +

k+ℓ−1

"

m=k+1

Steps “Future”

%

#

$

˜ gk xm , µm (xm ), wm + J k+ℓ (xk+ℓ )

Lookahead Minimization Cost-to-go Approximation

...Lookahead

MCTS Lookahead

Minimization

Cost-to-go

Approximation

Minimization

Cost-to-go

Approximation

Figure 2.2.1 Illustration of approximation in value space with ℓ-step lookahead.

J˜k+1 is obtained itself on the basis of a one-step lookahead approximation.

In other words, for all possible states xk+1 that can be generated via the system equation starting from xk , xk+1 = fk (xk , uk , wk ), we have

J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) =

min

uk+1 ∈Uk+1 (xk+1 )

n

E gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 )

o

+ J˜k+2 fk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 , wk+1 ) ,

* .

where J˜k+2 is some approximation of the optimal cost-to-go function Jk+2

Thus two-step lookahead amounts to solving a two-stage version of the DP problem with xk as the initial state and J˜k+2 as the terminal cost function. Given xk , the solution of this DP problem yields a two-stage policy that consists of the single control uk for the first lookahead stage, plus a control µk+1 (xk+1 ) for each value of xk+1 = fk (xk , uk , wk ) that can occur at the second lookahead stage k + 1. However, once this two-stage policy is computed, the controls µk+1 (xk+1 ) are discarded, and only uk is used as the control applied by the two-step lookahead policy at xk . At the next stage, this process is repeated, i.e., we solve a two-stage DP problem with xk+1 as the initial state and J˜k+3 as the terminal cost function.

Policies with lookahead of ℓ > 2 stages are similarly defined: at state xk , we solve an ℓ-stage version of the DP problem with xk as the initial state and J˜k+ℓ as the terminal cost function, and use the first control of the ℓ-stage policy thus obtained, while discarding the others; see Fig.

2.2.1. Of course, in the final stages where k > N − ℓ, we should shorten the size of lookahead to N − k. Note that the simplifications in the onestep lookahead minimization discussed in Section 2.1.2 (assumed certainty equivalence, adaptive sampling, etc), and model-free policy implementation

(Section 2.1.3) extend to multistep lookahead.

2.2.1

Multistep Lookahead and Rolling Horizon

There are several ways to compute the lookahead functions J˜k+ℓ in ℓstep lookahead, similar to the one-step lookahead case. However, there is also another possibility: with sufficiently long lookahead, we may capture enough of the character of the DP problem at hand so that a sophisticated choice of J˜k+ℓ may not be needed.

In particular, we may set J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) ≡ 0, or set

J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) = gN (xk+ℓ ).

The idea is to use a sufficiently large number of lookahead steps ℓ to ensure a reasonably faithful approximation of the optimal Q-factors Qk or cost-to* go functions Jk+ℓ within a constant.† This is also referred to as the rolling horizon approach, but essentially it is the same as multistep lookahead with a simplified cost-to-go approximation. Note that the idea of a rolling horizon is well-suited and applies with few modifications to infinite horizon problems as well.‡

Typically, as the size ℓ of the lookahead is chosen larger, the need for a good choice of J˜k+ℓ tends to diminish. The reason is that the effective cost-to-go approximation in ℓ-step lookahead consists of two components:

(a) The cost of an (ℓ − 1) step problem involving the last (ℓ − 1) stages of the ℓ-step lookahead.

(b) The terminal cost approximation J˜k+ℓ .

Since the (ℓ − 1)-step problem is treated by exact optimization, the overall approximation will be accurate if the contribution of the terminal cost approximation is relatively insignificant. This is likely to be true with large enough ℓ.

Thus, one is tempted to conjecture that if ℓ is increased, then the performance of the lookahead policy is improved. This, however, need not be true always, essentially because beyond the next ℓ stages, the policy may be “blind” to the presence of particularly “favorable” or “unfavorable” states. The following example is an illustration.

† See the discussion in Section 2.1.4. Generally, rolling horizon schemes tend to work well if the probability distribution of the state k+ℓ steps ahead is roughly independent of the current state and control, or is concentrated around “low cost” states.

‡ For infinite horizon problems the cost-to-go approximations J˜k will typically be the same at all stages k, i.e., J˜k ≡ J˜ for some J˜. As a result, the limited lookahead approach produces a stationary policy. In the case of discounted problems with an infinite horizon (see Chapter 4), a simple approach is to use a rolling horizon that is long enough so that the tail cost is negligible and can be replaced by zero, but it is also possible to use a small number of lookahead stages ℓ, as

˜ long as we compensate with a terminal cost function approximation J.

Sec. 2.2

Multistep Lookahead

0 1 2 1lookahead

10 2-Step3-Step lookahead

3-Step2lookahead

2 Stages 3 Stages

0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

Stages 3 Stages

0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

1 Optimal

2 1 10 2-Step lookahead 3-Step lookahead

2 Stages

3 Stages 3-Step lookahead 2 Stages 3

4 0u trajectory

Low Cost u r x Initial

x0

Current State Current

Stage 1 2

0 x4

High Cost Suboptimal

High Cost u′

2 Stages

3 Stages

4 0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead 3-Step

0 1lookahead

2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

3-Step lookahead 2 Stages 3 S

0 1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

3-Step lookahead lookahead 3-Step

2 Stages

3 Stages 2 Stages 3 Stage

1 2 1 10 2-Step lookahead

4 0

0 1 2 1 10 2-step lookahead 3-step lookahead 2 Stages 3 Stages

0 1 2 1 10 2-step lookahead 3-step lookahead 2 Stages 3 Stages

Figure 2.2.2 The 4-stage deterministic shortest problem of Example 2.2.1, illustrating how using a longer lookahead with a cost function approximation

J˜k (xk ) ≡ 0 may degrade the performance of the policy obtained.

Example 2.2.1

This is an oversimplified example that demonstrates a pitfall of the multistep lookahead and rolling horizon approaches with approximate cost-to-go functions

J˜k (xk ) ≡ 0.

It may happen that with longer lookahead the quality of the suboptimal control obtained is degraded.

Consider the 4-stage deterministic shortest problem of Fig. 2.2.2. At the initial state there are two possible controls, denoted u and u′ . At all other states there is only one control available, so a policy is specified by just the initial choice between controls u and u′ . The costs of the four transitions on the upper and the lower path are shown next to the corresponding arcs

(0, 1, 2, 1 for the upper path and 0, 2, 0, 10 on the lower path). From the initial state, 2-step lookahead with terminal cost approximation J˜2 = 0, compares

0 + 1 with 0 + 2 and prefers the optimal control u, while 3-step lookahead with terminal cost approximation J˜3 = 0, compares 0 + 1 + 2 with 0 + 2 + 0 and prefers the suboptimal control u′ . Thus using a longer lookahead yields worse performance. The problem here has to do with large cost changes at the

“edge” of the lookahead (a cost of 0 just after the 2-step lookahead, followed by a cost of 10 just after the 3-step lookahead).

2.2.2

Multistep Lookahead and Deterministic Problems

Generally, the implementation of multistep lookahead can be prohibitively time-consuming for stochastic problems, because it requires at each step the solution of a stochastic DP problem with a horizon that is equal to the size of the lookahead. However, when the problem is deterministic, the lookahead problems are also deterministic, and can be solved by shortest

...

Cost Function Approximation

e Monte Carlo tree search Lookahead tree xk

Cost Function Approximation

Cost Function Approximation J˜k+ℓ

...

Certainty equivalence Monte Carlo tree search Lookahead tree ty equivalence Monte Carlo tree search Lookahead tree ℓ Steps

Shortest path problem

Figure 2.2.3 Multistep lookahead for a deterministic finite-state problem. The lookahead minimization is equivalent to a shortest path problem.

path methods for a finite spaces problem, or even for an infinite spaces problem after some form of discretization. This makes deterministic problems particularly good candidates for the use of long-step lookahead in conjunction with the rolling horizon approach that we discussed in the preceding section.

Similarly, for a continuous-spaces deterministic optimal control problem, the lookahead minimization may be conveniently solvable by nonlinear programming methods. This idea finds wide application in the context of model predictive control (see the discussion in Section 2.5).

Partially Deterministic Form of Multistep Lookahead

When the problem is stochastic, one may consider a hybrid, partially deterministic approach: at state xk , allow for a stochastic disturbance wk at the current stage, but fix the future disturbances wk+1 , . . . , wk+ℓ−1 , up to the end of the lookahead horizon, to some typical values. This allows us to bring to bear deterministic methods in the computation of approximate costs-to-go beyond the first stage.

In particular, with this approach, the needed values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) will be computed by solving an ℓ − 1-step deterministic shortest path problem involving the typical values of the disturbances wk+1 , . . . , wk+ℓ−1 . Then the values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) will be used to compute the approximate Q-factors of pairs (xk , uk ) using the formula n

o

Q̃k (xk , uk ) = E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

which incorporates the first stage uncertainty. Finally, the control chosen by such a scheme at time k will be µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk );

cf. Eq. (2.7).

The idea of fixing uncertain quantities to typical values for approximation purposes is generally referred to as (assumed) certainty equivalence, and will be discussed at length in Section 2.3.2. The idea of using multistep lookahead for deterministic problems will also be reexamined in the context of the rollout algorithm in Section 2.4.1.

2.3 PROBLEM APPROXIMATION

A key issue in implementing a limited lookahead policy is the choice of the cost-to-go approximation at the end of the lookahead. In this section, we discuss the problem approximation approach whereby we approximate the optimal cost function Jk* with some function J˜k derived from a related but simpler problem (for example the optimal cost-to-go function of that problem). In the following subsections we consider two approaches:

(1) Simplifying the structure of the problem through enforced decomposition, e.g., replacing coupling constraints with simpler decoupled constraints or with Lagrange multiplier-related penalties.

(2) Simplifying the probabilistic structure of the problem, e.g., replacing stochastic disturbances with deterministic ones.

Another approach that can be viewed as problem approximation is aggregation, whereby the original problem is approximated with a related “aggregate” problem that has smaller dimension or fewer states. This problem is solved exactly to yield a cost-to-go approximation for the original problem.

Aggregation is also related to the feature-based parametric approximation ideas of Chapter 3, and will be discussed in Chapter 5.

2.3.1

Enforced Decomposition

The simplification/approximation approach is often well-suited for problems involving a number of subsystems that are coupled through the system equation, or the cost function, or the control constraints, but the degree of coupling is “relatively weak.” It is difficult to define precisely what constitutes “weak coupling,” but in specific problem contexts, usually this type of structure is easily recognized. For such problems it is often sensible to introduce approximations by artificially decoupling the subsystems in some way, thereby creating either a simpler problem or a simpler cost calculation, where subsystems can be dealt with in isolation.

There are a number of different ways to effect enforced decomposition, and the best approach is often problem-dependent. Generally, for a deterministic problem, enforced decomposition can be applied both off-line and on-line to produce a suboptimal control sequence. For a stochastic problem, it can be applied with off-line computation of the approximate cost-togo functions J˜k and on-line computation of the corresponding suboptimal policy. We will illustrate these two possibilities with various application contexts in what follows.

Optimization of One Subsystem at a Time

When a problem involves multiple subsystems, a potentially interesting approximation approach is to optimize one subsystem at a time. In this way the control computation at time k may become simpler.

As an example consider an N -stage deterministic problem, where the control uk at state xk consists of n components, uk = {u1k , . . . , unk }, with uik corresponding to the ith subsystem. Then to compute a cost-to-go approximation at a given state xk , one may optimize over the control sequence of a single subsystem, while keeping the controls of the remaining subsystems at some nominal values. Thus, upon arriving at xk , we first optimize over the control sequence {u1k , u1k+1 , . . . , u1N −1 } of the first subsystem, then optimize over the controls of the second subsystem, and so on, while keeping the controls of the other subsystem at the latest “optimal” values computed.

There are several possible variations; for example to make the order in which the subsystems are considered subject to optimization as well, or to repeat cycling through the subsystems multiple times, each time using the results of the latest computation as nominal values of subsystem controls. This is similar to a “coordinate descent” approach, used in other optimization contexts.

Additional variations are obtained when we use approximate minimization over uk in Eq. (2.1), and also when the expected value over wk is computed approximately via adaptive simulation or a certainty equivalence approximation (cf. Section 2.1.2).

Example 2.3.1 (Vehicle Routing)

Consider n vehicles that move along the arcs of a given graph. Each node of the graph has a known “value” and the first vehicle that will pass through the node will collect its value, while vehicles that pass subsequently through the node do not collect any value. This may serve as a model of a situation where there are various valuable tasks to be performed at the nodes of a transportation network, and each task can be performed at most once and by a single vehicle. We assume that each vehicle starts at a given node and after at most a given number of arc moves, it must return to some other

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Vehicle 1 Vehicle 2

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Vehicle 1 Vehicle 2

Figure 2.3.1 Schematic illustration of the vehicle routing problem and the onevehicle-at-a-time approach. As an example, given the position pair xk = (1, 4) of the two vehicles and the current valuable tasks at positions 6 and 9, we consider moves to all possible positions pairs xk+1 :

(2, 2), (2, 3), (2, 6), (2, 7), (3, 2), (3, 3), (3, 6), (3, 7).

From each of these pairs, we first compute the best route of vehicle 1 assuming vehicle 2 does not move, and then the best route vehicle 2, taking into account the previously computed route of vehicle 1. We then select the pair xk+1 that results in optimal value, and move the vehicles to the corresponding positions.

given node. The problem is to find a route for each vehicle satisfying these constraints, so that the total value collected by the vehicles is maximized.

This is a difficult combinatorial problem that in principle can be approached by DP. In particular, we can view as state the n-tuple of current positions of the vehicles together with the list of nodes that have been visited by some vehicle in the past, and have thus “lost” their value. Unfortunately, the number of these states is enormous (it increases exponentially with the number of nodes and the number of vehicles). The version of the problem that involves a single vehicle, while still difficult in principle, can often be solved in reasonable time either exactly by DP or fairly accurately using a suitable heuristic. Thus a one-step lookahead policy suggests itself, with the value-to-go approximation obtained by solving single vehicle problems.

In particular, in a one-step lookahead scheme, at a given time k and from a given state xk we consider all possible n-tuples of moves by the n vehicles. At the resulting state xk+1 corresponding to each n-tuple of vehicle moves, we approximate the optimal value-to-go with the value corresponding to a suboptimal set of paths. These paths are obtained as follows: we fix an order of the vehicles and we calculate a path for the first vehicle, starting at xk+1 , assuming the other vehicles do not move. (This is done either optimally by DP, or near optimally using some heuristic.) Then we calculate a path for the second vehicle, taking into account the value collected by the first vehicle,

and we similarly continue: for each vehicle, we calculate in the given order a path, taking into account the value collected by the preceding vehicles. We end up with a set of paths that have a certain total value associated with them. This is the value J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) associated with the successor state xk+1 .

We repeat with all successor states xk+1 corresponding to all the n-tuples of vehicle moves that are possible at xk . We then use as suboptimal control at xk the n-tuple of moves that yields the best value; see Fig. 2.3.1.

There are several enhancements and variations of the scheme just described. For example, we can consider multiple alternative orders for optimizing paths one-at-a-time, and choose the n-tuple of moves that corresponds to the best value obtained. Other variations may include travel costs between nodes of the graph, and constraints on how many tasks can be performed by each vehicle.

Constraint Decoupling by Constraint Relaxation

Let us now consider problems involving coupled subsystems where the coupling comes only through the control constraint. Typical cases involve the allocation of a limited resource to a set of subsystems whose system equations are completely decoupled from each other. We will illustrate with examples a few enforced decomposition approaches to deal with such situations. The first approach is constraint relaxation, whereby the constraint set is replaced by another constraint set that does not involve coupling.

Example 2.3.2 (Restless Multiarmed Bandit Problems)

An interesting DP model, generally referred to as the multiarmed bandit problem, involves n projects of which only one can be worked on at any time period. Each project i is characterized at time k by its state xik . If project i is worked on at time k, one receives an expected reward Ri (xik ), and the state xik then evolves according to the equation xik+1 = f i (xik , wki ),

if i is worked on at time k,

where wki is a random disturbance with probability distribution depending on xik but not on prior disturbances. If project i is not worked on, its state changes according to i

xik+1 = f (xik , wik ), i

where f is a given function and wik is a random disturbance with distribution i depending on xik but not on prior disturbances. Furthermore, a reward R (xik )

i is earned, where R is a given function. The projects are coupled through the control constraint (only one of the projects may be worked on at any one

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

period). † A suboptimal enforced decomposition approach is to consider the n single project problems where a single project is worked on through the entire remaining horizon, and add the contributions of the n problems to form an optimal reward approximation.

In particular, suppose that the optimal reward function Jk∗ (x1 , . . . , xn )

is approximated by a separable function of the form n

X

J˜ik (xi ),

i=1

where each J˜ik is a function that quantifies the contribution of the ith project to the total reward. The corresponding one-step lookahead policy selects at time k the project i that maximizes

Ri (xi ) +

X

j

R (xj ) + E J˜ik+1 f i (xi , wi )



j6=i



+

X

n

j

E J˜jk+1 f (xj , wj )

j6=i

o

,

which can also be written as

n

i i

Ri (xi ) − R (xi ) + E J˜ik+1 f i (xi , wi ) −J˜ik+1 f (xi , wi )

+

n n

X



j j

R (xj ) + E J˜jk+1 f (xj , wj )



j=1

o

 o

.

Noting that the last term in the above expression does not depend on i, it follows that the one-step lookahead policy takes the form work on project i

m̃ik (xi ) = max m̃jk (xj ) ,

if



j

where for all i,

i i m̃ik (xi ) = Ri (xi ) − R (xi ) + E J˜ik+1 f i (xi , wi ) −J˜ik+1 f (xi , wi )







.

† In the classical and simplest version of the problem, the state of a project that is not worked on remains unchanged and produces no reward, i.e., xik+1 = xik ,

i

R (xik ) = 0,

if i is not worked on at time k.

This problem admits optimal policies with a nice structure that can be computationally exploited. The problem has a long history and is discussed in many sources; we refer to [Ber12] and the references quoted there. In particular, in favorable instances of the problem, optimal policies have the character of an index rule, which is structurally similar to the decoupled suboptimal decision rules discussed in this section, and has been analyzed extensively, together with its variations and special cases. The term “restless” in the title of the present example, introduced by Whittle [Whi88], refers to the fact that the states of the projects that are not worked on may change.

An important question for the implementation of the preceding suboptimal control scheme is the determination of the separable reward function terms J˜ik+1 . There are several possibilities here, and the best choice may strongly depend on the problem’s structure. One possibility is to compute

J˜ik+1 as the optimal cost-to-go function for a problem involving just project i, i.e., assuming that none of the other projects j 6= i will be worked on for the remaining periods k +1, . . . , N −1. This corresponds to restricting the control constraint set of the problem, and involves a single-project optimization that may be tractable.

An alternative possibility is to use a separable parametric approximation of the form n

X

i

J˜ik+1 (xik+1 , rk+1

),

i=1

i i where rk+1 are vectors of “tunable” parameters. The values of rk+1 can be obtained by some “training” algorithm such as the ones to be discussed in

Chapter 3.

Constraint Decoupling by Lagrangian Relaxation

Another approach to deal with coupled constraints is to replace them with linear Lagrange multiplier-related penalty functions that are added to the cost function. We illustrate this approach with an extension of the preceding multiarmed bandit Example 2.3.2.

Example 2.3.3 (Separable Lower Bound Approximation in

Multiarmed Bandit Problems)

Let us consider a version of the multiple projects Example 2.3.2 involving a more general form of control. Here there are n subsystems, with a control uik applied to subsystem i at time k. Instead of the requirement that only one subsystem is worked on at any one time, we assume a control constraint of the form uk = (u1k , . . . , un k = 0, 1, . . . , k ) ∈ U, where the set U is given (Example 2.3.2 is obtained as the special case where

U consists of the union of the coordinate vectors, i.e., those whose components are equal to 0, except for one component that is equal to 1). The ith subsystem is described by xik+1 = f i (xik , uik , wki ),

i = 1, . . . , n, k = 0, 1, . . . ,

where xik is the state taking values in some space, uik is the control, wki is a random disturbance, and f i is a given function. We assume that wki is selected according to a probability distribution that may depend on xik and uik , but not on prior disturbances or the disturbances wkj of the other subsystems j 6= i. The cost incurred at the kth stage by the ith subsystem is g i (xik , uik , wki ),

(2.13)

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

where g i is a given one-stage cost function. For notational convenience, we assume stationarity of the system equation and the cost per stage, but the approach to be discussed applies to the nonstationary case as well.

One possibility for a separable approximation of the problem is to replace the constraint uk ∈ U by a smaller or larger decoupled constraint, i.e., requiring that uik ∈ U i ,

i = 1, . . . , n, k = 0, 1, . . . ,

where the subsets U 1 , . . . , U n satisfy U 1 × · · · × U n ⊂ U or U ⊂ U 1 × · · · × U n , respectively.

We discuss another possibility for the case where the constraint set U includes linear inequality constraints. As a simple example, let us focus on a constraint set U of the form

U=

(

n

(u , . . . , u )

i

i

u ∈ U ⊂ ℜ, i = 1, . . . , n,

n

X

i i

cu ≤b

i=1

)

,

(2.14)

where c1 , . . . , cn , and b are some scalars. † Here we replace the coupling constraint n

X

ci uik ≤ b,

k = 0, 1, . . . ,

(2.15)

i=1

by a “relaxed” (larger) constraint whereby we require that

N−1

n

XX

ci uik ≤ N b.

(2.16)

k=0 i=1

Roughly speaking, the constraint (2.16) requires that the coupling constraint

(2.15) is satisfied “on the average,” over the N stages.

We may now obtain a lower bound approximation of the optimal cost of our problem by assigning a scalar Lagrange multiplier λ ≥ 0 to the constraint

(2.16), and add a Lagrangian term

N−1

λ

n

XX k=0 i=1

ci uik

− Nb

!

(2.17)

to the cost function. This amounts to replacing the kth stage cost (2.13) by g i (xik , uik , wki ) + λci uik , while replacing the coupling constraint (2.14) with the decoupled constraint uik ∈ U i ,

i = 1, . . . , n,

† More general cases, where ui and b are multi-dimensional, and ci are replaced by matrices of appropriate dimension, can be handled similarly, albeit with greater computational complications.

cf. Eq. (2.14). This is a lower bound approximation, as is typical in Lagrange multiplier-based decomposition approaches in linear and nonlinear programming (see e.g., [BeT97], [Ber16b]). To see this, note that for every feasible solution of the original problem, the Lagrangian term (2.17) makes a nonpositive contribution when added to the cost function, while with the constraint relaxed, the resulting optimal cost can only be reduced further.

With the subsystems now decoupled, we may solve each single subsystem problem separately, thereby obtaining a separable lower bound approximation n

X

J˜ik (xik , λ)

i=1

for every k = 1, . . . , N − 1. This approximation can in turn be used to obtain a suboptimal one-step lookahead policy. Note that we may also try to optimize the approximation over λ, either by ad hoc experimentation or by a more systematic optimization method.† Another possibility is to use a more general Lagrangian term of the form

N−1

X k=0

λk

n

X i=1

ci uik

− Nb

!

,

in place of the term (2.17), where λ0 , . . . , λN−1 ≥ 0 are time-varying scalar multipliers.

2.3.2 Probabilistic Approximation - Certainty Equivalent

Control

We will now consider problem approximation based on modifying the underlying probabilistic structure. The most common example of this type is the certainty equivalent controller (CEC). It replaces the stochastic disturbances with deterministic variables that are fixed at some “typical” values.

Thus it acts as if a form of the certainty equivalence principle were holding, cf. the discussion of linear quadratic problems in Section 1.3.7.

The advantage of the CEC is that it involves a much less demanding computation than the stochastic DP algorithm: it requires the solution of a deterministic optimal control problem at each stage. This problem yields an optimal control sequence, the first component of which is used at the current stage, while the remaining components are discarded. Thus the

CEC is able to deal with stochastic and even partial information problems by using the more flexible and potent methodology of deterministic optimal control.

† Maximization of the lower bound approximation over λ is an interesting possibility. This is common in duality-based optimization. Generally the approach of this example falls within the framework of Lagrangian relaxation, a decomposition method that is based on the use of Lagrange multipliers and duality theory; see e.g., [BeT97], [Ber15a], [Ber16a].

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

We will describe the CEC for the stochastic DP problem of Section

1.2. Suppose that for every state-control pair (xk , uk ) we have selected a

“typical” value of the disturbance, which we denote by w̃k (xk , uk ). For example the expected values w̃k (xk , uk ) = E{wk | xk , uk }, can serve as typical values, if the disturbance spaces are convex subsets of

Euclidean spaces [so that they include w̃k (xk , uk )].

To implement the CEC at state xk and stage k we solve a deterministic optimal control problem obtained from the original problem by replacing all uncertain quantities by their typical values. In particular, we solve the problem

#

"

N

−1

X



(2.18)

gN (xN ) + gi xi , ui , w̃i (xi , ui ) .

min xi+1 =fi (xi ,ui ,w̃i (xi ,ui ))

ui ∈Ui (xi ), i=k,...,N−1

i=k

If {ũk , . . . , ũN −1 } is the optimal control sequence for this problem, we use the first control in this sequence and discard the remaining controls:

µ̃k (xk ) = ũk .

An alternative implementation of the CEC is to compute off-line an optimal policy

 d µ0 (x0 ), . . . , µdN −1 (xN −1 )

for the deterministic problem minimize gN (xN ) +

N

−1

X k=0

 gk xk , µk (xk ), w̃k (xk , uk )

 subject to xk+1 = fk xk , µk (xk ), w̃k (xk , uk ) ,

µk (xk ) ∈ Uk ,

k ≥ 0,

(2.19)

by using the DP algorithm. Then the control input µ̃k (Ik ) applied by the

CEC at time k is given by µ̃k (Ik ) = µdk (xk ).

The two variants of the CEC just given are equivalent in terms of performance. The main difference is that the first variant is well-suited for on-line replanning, while the second variant is more suitable for an off-line implementation.

Finally, let us note that the CEC can be extended to imperfect state observation problems, where the state xk is not known at time k, but instead an estimate of xk is available, which is based on measurements that have been obtained up to time xk . In this case, we find a suboptimal control similarly, as in Eqs. (2.18) and (2.19), but with xk replaced by the estimate, as if this estimate were exact.

Certainty Equivalent Control with Heuristics

Even though the CEC approach simplifies a great deal the computations, it still requires the optimal solution of a deterministic tail subproblem at each stage [cf. Eq. (2.18)]. This problem may still be difficult, and a more convenient approach may be to solve it suboptimally using a heuristic algorithm. In particular, given the state xk at time k, we may use some (easily implementable) heuristic to find a suboptimal control sequence

{ũk , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 } for the problem of Eq. (2.18), and then use ũk as the control for stage k.

An important enhancement of this idea is to use minimization over the first control uk and to use the heuristic only for the remaining stages k + 1, . . . , N − 1. To implement this variant of the CEC, we must apply at time k a control ũk that minimizes over uk ∈ Uk (xk ) the expression

 gk xk , uk , w̃k (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 (xk+1 ),

(2.20)

where

 xk+1 = fk xk , uk , w̃k (xk , uk ) ,

(2.21)

and Hk+1 is the cost-to-go function corresponding to the heuristic, i.e.,

Hk+1 (xk+1 ) is the cost incurred over the remaining stages k + 1, . . . , N − 1 starting from a state xk+1 , using the heuristic. This is a hybrid approach:

it resembles one-step lookahead with lookahead function Hk+1 , and it resembles certainty equivalence in that the uncertain quantities have been replaced by their typical values.

Note that for any next state xk+1 , it is not necessary to have a closedform expression for the heuristic cost-to-go Hk+1 (xk+1 ). Instead we can generate this cost by running the heuristic from xk+1 and computing the corresponding cost. Thus all the possible next states xk+1 must be computed for all possible values of the control uk , and then the heuristic must be run from each of these xk+1 to calculate Hk+1 (xk+1 ), which is needed in the minimization of the expression (2.20).

Example 2.3.4 (Parking with Probability Estimates)

Consider the one-directional parking problem of Example 1.3.3, where a driver is looking for a parking space along a line of N spaces, with a garage at the end of the line (position N ). The driver starts at space 0 and traverses the parking spaces sequentially, i.e., continues to subsequent spaces, up to a decision to park in space k at cost c(k), if space k is free, or upon reaching the garage where parking is mandatory at cost C. In Example 1.3.3, we assumed that space k is free with a given and fixed probability p(k), independently of whether other parking spaces are free or not.

Assume instead that p(k) is an estimate that is based on the driver’s observations of the status of preceding spaces. For example, this estimation process may involve exploiting probabilistic relations that may exist between

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

the parking statuses of different spaces. In particular, let us assume that the driver, upon arrival at space k, can estimate the belief state of the spaces that lie ahead, i.e., the vector of conditional probabilities p(k +1), . . . , p(N )

given the observations of the spaces 0, . . . , k.

The problem now becomes very hard to solve by exact DP, because the state space is infinite: at time k the state consists of the free/taken status of the current position k, plus the belief state of the spaces that lie ahead.

However, a simple suboptimal approach to the problem can be based on certainty equivalence: at time k, we fix the free/taken probabilities of the spaces that lie ahead to their current belief values, and act as if these values will not change in the future. Then upon reaching space k, the fast DP algorithm of Example 1.3.3 can be used to solve on-line the corresponding fixed probabilities problem, and to find the corresponding suboptimal decision.

As an illustration, let p(k) be estimated by using the ratio R(k) of the number of free spaces encountered up to reaching space k divided by the total number k + 1. Knowing R(k), the driver adjusts the probabilities p(m) for m > k to the level



p̂ m, R(k) = γp(m) + (1 − γ)R(k), where γ is a known constant between 0 and 1. The problem can then be solved by exact DP, by using as state at time k the free/taken status of space k together with the ratio R(k) [in the terminology of Section 1.3, R(k) is a sufficient statistic, which contains all the relevant information for the purposes of control]. The number of possible values of R(k) grows exponentially with k, so the solution by exact DP may become intractable for large N . However, by applying the probabilistic approximation approach of this example, the corresponding suboptimal policy may be easily obtained and implemented on-line.

Partial Certainty Equivalent Control

In the preceding descriptions of the CEC all future and present uncertain quantities are fixed at their typical values. A useful variation is to fix at typical values only some of these quantities. For example, a partial state information problem may be treated as one of perfect state information, using an estimate x̃k of xk as if it were exact, while fully

 taking into account the stochastic nature of the disturbances. Thus, if µp0 (x0 ), . . . , µpN −1 (xN −1 )

is an optimal policy obtained from the DP algorithm for the stochastic perfect state information problem

)

(

N

−1

X

 minimize E gN (xN ) + gk xk , µk (xk ), wk k=0

 subject to xk+1 = fk xk , µk (xk ), wk , µk (xk ) ∈ Uk , k = 0, . . . , N − 1,

then the control input applied by this variant of CEC at time k is µpk (x̃k ), where x̃k is the estimate of xk given the information available up to time k. Let us provide an example.

Example 2.3.5 (The Unscrupulous Innkeeper)

Consider an innkeeper who charges one of m different rates r1 , . . . , rm for a room as the day progresses, depending on whether he has many or few vacancies, so as to maximize his expected total income during the day. A quote of a rate ri is accepted with probability pi and is rejected with probability

1 − pi , in which case the customer departs, never to return during that day.

When the number y of customers that will ask for a room during the rest of the day (including the customer currently asking for a room) is known and the number of vacancies is x, the optimal expected income J˜(x, y) of the innkeeper is given by the DP algorithm

˜ y) = max

J(x,

i=1,...,m

˜ − 1, y − 1) + (1 − pi )J(x,

˜ y − 1) , pi ri + J(x







(2.22)

for all x ≥ 1 and y ≥ 1, with initial conditions

˜ 0) = J˜(0, y) = 0,

J(x,

for all x and y.

˜ y) for all pairs (x, y).

This algorithm can be used to obtain the values of J(x,

Consider now the case where the innkeeper does not know y at the times of decision, but instead only maintains a probability distribution for y. Then, it can be seen that the problem becomes a difficult partial state information problem. The exact DP algorithm should then be executed over the set of the pairs of x and the belief state of y. Yet a reasonable partially stochastic

CEC is based on approximating the optimal cost-to-go of subsequent decisions with J˜(x − 1, ỹ − 1) or J˜(x, ỹ − 1), where the function J˜ is calculated by the preceding recursion (2.22) and ỹ is an estimate of y, such as the closest integer to the expected value of y. In particular, according to this one-step lookahead policy, when the innkeeper has a number of vacancies x ≥ 1, he quotes to the current customer the rate that maximizes

˜ − 1, ỹ − 1) − J˜(x, ỹ − 1) .

pi ri + J(x



Thus in this suboptimal scheme, the innkeeper acts as if the estimate ỹ were exact.

Other Variations of Certainty Equivalent Control

It is also possible to use more general approaches to implement one-step lookahead control based on simplification of the probabilistic structure of the problem. The possibilities are highly problem-dependent by nature, but we may distinguish a few general techniques, which we illustrate through examples.

Sec. 2.3

Problem Approximation

Example 2.3.6 (Decoupling Disturbance Distributions)

Let us consider a CEC approach in the context of enforced decomposition (cf.

Section 2.3.1) when the subsystems are coupled only through the disturbance.

In particular, consider n subsystems of the form xik+1 = f i (xik , uik , wki ),

i = 1, . . . , n.

Here the ith subsystem has its own state xik , control uik , and cost per stage g i (xik , uik , wki ), but the probability distribution of wki depends on the full state xk = (x1k , . . . , xn k ).

A natural form of suboptimal control is to solve at each stage k and for each i, the ith subsystem optimization problem where the probability distrii i bution of the future disturbances wk+1

, . . . , wN−1 is “decoupled,” in the sense that it depends only on the corresponding “local” states xik+1 , . . . , xiN−1 . This distribution may be derived by using some nominal values x̃jk+1 , . . . , x̃jN−1 , j 6= i, of the future states of the other subsystems, and these nominal values may in turn depend on the full current state xk . The first control uik in the optimal policy thus obtained is applied at the ith subsystem in stage k, and the remaining portion of this policy is discarded.

Example 2.3.7 (Approximation Using Scenarios)

We noted earlier the possibility to approximate the optimal cost-to-go with a CEC approach, whereby for a given state xk+1 at time k + 1, we fix the remaining disturbances at some nominal values w̃k+1 , . . . , w̃N−1 , and we compute an optimal control or heuristic-based trajectory starting from xk+1 at time k + 1.

This CEC approximation involves a single nominal trajectory of the remaining uncertainty. To strengthen this approach, it is natural to consider multiple trajectories of the uncertainty, called scenarios, and to construct an approximation to the optimal cost-to-go that involves, for every one of the scenarios, the cost of either an optimal or a heuristic policy.

Mathematically, we assume that we have a method, which at a given state xk+1 , generates q uncertainty sequences s s ws (xk+1 ) = (wk+1

, . . . , wN−1

),

s = 1, . . . , q.

∗

These are the scenarios considered at state xk+1 . The optimal cost Jk+1

(xk+1 )

is then approximated by

J˜k+1 (xk+1 , r) =

q

X

rs Cs (xk+1 ),

(2.23)

s=1

where r = (r1 , . . . , rq ) is a probability distribution, i.e., a vector of nonnegative parameters that add to 1, and Cs (xk+1 ) is the cost corresponding to an occurrence of the scenario ws (xk+1 ), when starting from state xk+1 and using either an optimal or a given heuristic policy.

At State xk

DP minimization

Heuristic Cost“Future”

First ℓ Steps “Future”

min

uk ,µk+1 ,...,µk+ℓ−1

E

!

gk (xk , uk , wk ) +

k+ℓ−1

"

m=k+1

%

#

$ gk xm , µm (xm ), wm + J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ )

Heuristic

Cost

... MCTS Lookahead Minimization Cost-to-go

Approximation

Obtained with by running the Run the Base Policy

2 1 10 2-step lookahead 3-step lookahead 2 Stages 3 Stages

Figure 2.4.1 Schematic illustration of rollout with ℓ-step lookahead. The approximate cost J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) is obtained by running a heuristic algorithm/base policy from state xk+ℓ .

There may be several problem-dependent ways to generate the scenarios, possibly including randomization and/or simulation. The parameters r1 , . . . , rq may depend on the time index, and may be interpreted as “aggregate probabilities” that encode the aggregate effect on the cost-to-go function of uncertainty sequences that are similar to the scenario ws (xk+1 ). They may be computed using some ad hoc scheme, or some more systematic approach.

The idea of simplifying the probabilistic model of the system, possibly using a model-free Monte-Carlo type of process, is also related to the rollout approach that is the subject of the next section.

2.4 ROLLOUT

The principal aim of rollout is policy improvement , i.e., start with a suboptimal/heuristic policy, called the base policy (or sometimes, the default policy), and produce an improved policy by limited lookahead minimization with use of the heuristic at the end. This policy is called the rollout policy, and the fact that it is indeed “improved” will be established, under various conditions, in what follows in this section and also in Chapter 4.

In its purest one-step lookahead form, rollout can be defined very simply: it is approximation in value space with the approximate cost-to-go values J˜k+1 (xk+1 ) calculated by running the base policy, starting from each possible next state xk+1 . There is also an ℓ-step lookahead generalization, where the heuristic is used to obtain the approximate cost-to-go values

J˜k+ℓ (xk+ℓ ) from each possible next state xk+ℓ (see Fig. 2.4.1). In a variant for problems involving a long horizon, the run of the base policy may be

“truncated,” i.e., it may be used for a limited number of steps, with some cost function approximation at the end to take into account the cost of the remaining steps.

The choice of base policy is of course important for the performance of the rollout approach. However, experimental evidence has shown that the choice of base policy may not be crucial for many contexts, and in

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

fact surprisingly good rollout performance may be attained even with a relatively poor base heuristic, particularly with a long lookahead.

Note also here a connection and overlap between the rollout and problem approximation approaches. Suppose that we use as base heuristic an optimal policy for the approximating problem. Then the one-step (or multistep) rollout policy is the same as the one obtained by one-step (or multistep, respectively) lookahead with terminal cost function approximation equal to the optimal cost of the approximating problem.

In Chapter 4 within the context of infinite horizon problems, we will view there the method of policy iteration as a perpetual rollout algorithm, whereby a sequence of suboptimal policies is generated, each one being a rollout policy obtained by using the preceding one as a base policy. In this chapter, however, we focus on a one-time policy improvement starting from a given base policy.

We will describe rollout first for finite-state deterministic problems and one-step lookahead, and then for stochastic problems, in Sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2, respectively. We will discuss rollout for infinite-spaces problems, including model predictive control in Section 2.5. We will also discuss the use of rollout in combination with some other approximation scheme. This is to use one-step or multistep lookahead with the cost function approximation consisting of two parts:

(a) Rollout with the given base policy over a limited horizon.

(b) A terminal cost function approximation at the end of the rollout horizon, such as an estimate of the true cost function of the policy.

We will reconsider schemes of this type in Chapter 4, Section 4.5.3, in the context of infinite horizon problems.

2.4.1 On-Line Rollout for Deterministic Finite-State Problems

Let us consider a deterministic DP problem with a finite number of controls and a given initial state (so the number of states is also finite). Given a state xk at time k, rollout considers all the tail subproblems that start at every possible next state xk+1 , and solves them suboptimally by using some algorithm, referred to as base heuristic.† Thus when at xk , rollout generates on-line the next states xk+1 that correspond to all uk ∈ Uk (xk ), and uses the base heuristic to compute the sequence of states {xk+1 , . . . , xN } and controls {uk+1 , . . . , uN −1 } such that xi+1 = fi (xi , ui ),

i = k, . . . , N − 1.

† For deterministic problems we prefer to use the term “base heuristic” rather than “base policy” for reasons to be explained later in this section, in the context of the notion of sequential consistency.

Next Cities Next States

x0

k xk+1

Nearest

Neighbor Heuristic u x k

-Factors Current State x u′

′

Current

) . . . State xk k k xk+1 x1

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

′ u′′ x k k

′′

+1 xk+1

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

k

xN

x′N x′′N

. . . Q-Factors

Figure 2.4.2 Schematic illustration of rollout with one-step lookahead for a deterministic problem. At state xk , for every pair (xk , uk ), uk ∈ Uk (xk ), the base heuristic generates a Q-factor Q̃k (xk , uk ) [cf. Eq. (2.25)], and selects the control µ̃k (xk ) with minimal Q-factor.

The rollout algorithm then applies the control that minimizes over uk ∈

Uk (xk ) the tail cost expression for stages k to N :

gk (xk , uk ) + gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 ) + · · · + gN −1 (xN −1 , uN −1 ) + gN (xN ). (2.24)

Equivalently, and more succinctly, the rollout algorithm applies at state xk the control µ̃k (xk ) given by the minimization µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk ),

where Q̃k (xk , uk ) is the approximate Q-factor defined by



Q̃k (xk , uk ) = gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk ) ,

(2.25)

with Hk+1 (xk+1 ) denoting the cost of the base heuristic starting from state xk+1 [i.e., Hk+1 (xk+1 ) is the sum of all the terms in Eq. (2.24), except the first]; see Fig. 2.4.2. The rollout process defines a suboptimal policy π̃ = {µ̃0 , . . . , µ̃N −1 }, referred to as the rollout policy.

Example 2.4.1 (Traveling Salesman Problem)

Let us consider the traveling salesman problem, whereby a salesman wants to find a minimum mileage/cost tour that visits each of N given cities c =

0, . . . , N − 1 exactly once and returns to the city he started from (cf. Example

1.3.1). With each pair of distinct cities c, c′ , we associate a traversal cost g(c, c′ ). Note that we assume that we can go directly from every city to every other city. There is no loss of generality in doing so because we can assign a very high cost g(c, c′ ) to any pair of cities (c, c′ ) that is precluded from participation in the solution. The problem is to find a visit order that goes through each city exactly once and whose sum of costs is minimum.

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Current Partial Tour Next Cities Nearest

NeighborTours

Complete

k xN k xk+1

Initial City Current Partial

Neighbor Heuristic uk Nearest xTour Nearest

Initial City Current Current

Partial Tour

Next

Cities

Neighbor

Partial Tour

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

′ k uk x′k+1 x′N

Current

State x x0

) ...

k

0 x1

′ u′′ x

Nearest

Neighbor

Heuristic k k

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

′′ x′′N

+1 xk+1

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic

Figure 2.4.3 Schematic illustration of rollout with the nearest neighbor heuristic for the traveling salesman problem. The initial state x0 consists of a single city. The final state xN is a complete tour of N cities, containing each city exactly once.

There are many heuristic approaches for solving the traveling salesman problem. For illustration purposes, let us focus on the simple nearest neighbor heuristic, which constructs a sequence of partial tours, i.e., sequences of ordered collections of distinct cities. Here, we select a single city c0 and at each iteration, we add to the current partial tour a city that does not close a cycle and minimizes the cost of the enlargement. In particular, after k iterations, we have a sequence {c0 , . . . , ck } consisting of distinct cities, and at the next iteration, we add a new city ck+1 that minimizes g(ck , ck+1 ) over all cities ck+1 6= c0 , . . . , ck . After the nearest neighbor heuristic selects city cN−1 , a complete tour is formed with total cost g(c0 , c1 ) + · · · + g(cN−2 , cN−1 ) + g(cN−1 , c0 ).

(2.26)

We can formulate the traveling salesman problem as a DP problem as we discussed in Example 1.3.1. We choose a starting city, say c0 , as the initial state x0 . Each state xk corresponds to a partial tour (c0 , c1 , . . . , ck )

consisting of distinct cities. The states xk+1 , next to xk , are sequences of the form (c0 , c1 , . . . , ck , ck+1 ) which correspond to adding one more unvisited city ck+1 6= c0 , c1 , . . . , ck . The terminal states xN are the complete tours of the form (c0 , c1 , . . . , cN−1 , c0 ), and the cost of the corresponding sequence of city choices is the cost of the corresponding complete tour. Thus a state trajectory yields a complete tour with total cost given by Eq. (2.26).

Let us now use as a base heuristic the nearest neighbor method. The corresponding rollout algorithm operates as follows: After k < N − 1 iterations, we have a state xk , i.e., sequence {c0 , . . . , ck } consisting of distinct cities. At the next iteration, we add one more city as follows: We run the nearest neighbor heuristic starting from each of the sequences of the form

{c0 , . . . , ck , c} where c 6= c1 , . . . , ck . We then select as next city ck+1 the city c that yielded the minimum cost tour under the nearest neighbor heuristic;

see Fig. 2.4.3.

Cost Improvement with a Rollout Algorithm - Sequential

Consistency

The definition of the rollout algorithm leaves open the choice of the base heuristic. There are several types of suboptimal solution methods that can be used as base heuristics, such as greedy algorithms, local search, genetic algorithms, tabu search, and others. Clearly we want to choose a base heuristic that strikes a good balance between quality of solutions produced and computational tractability.

Intuitively, we expect that the rollout policy’s performance is no worse than the one of the base heuristic. Since rollout optimizes over the first control before applying the heuristic, it makes sense to conjecture that it performs better than applying the heuristic without the first control optimization. However, some special conditions must hold in order to guarantee this cost improvement property. We provide two such conditions, sequential consistency and sequential improvement , and then show how to modify the algorithm to deal with the case where these conditions are not satisfied.

We say that the base heuristic is sequentially consistent if it has the property that when it generates the sequence

{xk , xk+1 , . . . , xN } starting from state xk , it also generates the sequence

{xk+1 , . . . , xN } starting from state xk+1 . In other words, the base heuristic is sequentially consistent if it “stays the course”: when the starting state xk is moved forward to the next state xk+1 of its state trajectory, the heuristic will not deviate from the remainder of the trajectory.

As an example, the reader may verify that the nearest neighbor heuristic described in the traveling salesman Example 2.4.1 is sequentially consistent. Similar examples include the use of many types of greedy heuristics (see [Ber17], Section 6.4). Generally most heuristics used in practice satisfy the sequential consistency condition at “most” states xk . However, some heuristics of interest may violate this condition at some states.

Conceptually, it is important to note that sequential consistency is equivalent to the heuristic being a legitimate DP policy. By this we mean that there exists a policy {µ0 , . . . , µN −1 } such that the sequence generated by the base heuristic starting from any state xk is the same as the one generated by {µ0 , . . . , µN −1 } starting from the same state xk . To see this, note that a policy clearly has the sequential consistency property, and conversely, a sequentially consistent base heuristic defines a policy: the one that moves from xk to the state xk+1 that lies on the path {xk , xk+1 , . . . , xN } generated by the base heuristic.

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Based on this fact, we can show that the rollout algorithm obtained with a sequentially consistent base heuristic yields an improved cost over the base heuristic. In particular, let us consider the rollout policy π̃ =

{µ̃0 , . . . , µ̃N −1 }, and let Jk,π̃ (xk ) denote the cost obtained with π̃ starting from xk . We claim that

Jk,π̃ (xk ) ≤ Jˆk (xk ),

for all xk and k,

(2.27)

where Jˆk (xk ) denotes the cost of the base heuristic starting from xk .

We prove this inequality by induction. Clearly it holds for k = N , since JN,π̃ = HN = gN . Assume that it holds for index k + 1. For any state xk , let uk be the control applied by the base heuristic at xk . Then we have







Jk,π̃ (xk ) = gk xk , µ̃k (xk ) + Jk+1,π̃ fk xk , µ̃k (xk )





≤ gk xk , µ̃k (xk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , µ̃k (xk ))

h

i

(2.28)

gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk )

= min uk ∈Uk (xk )





≤ gk xk , uk + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk )

= Hk (xk ),

where:

(a) The first equality is the DP equation for the rollout policy π̃.

(b) The first inequality holds by the induction hypothesis.

(c) The second equality holds by the definition of the rollout algorithm.

(d) The third equality is the DP equation for the policy that corresponds to the base heuristic (this is the step where we need sequential consistency).

This completes the induction proof of the cost improvement property (2.27).

Sequential Improvement

We will now show that the rollout policy has no worse performance than its base heuristic under a condition that is weaker than sequential consistency.

Let us recall that the rollout algorithm π̃ = {µ̃0 , . . . , µ̃N −1 } is defined by the minimization µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk )

where Q̃k (xk , uk ) is the approximate Q-factor defined by



Q̃k (xk , uk ) = gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk ) ,

[cf. Eqs. (2.25)], and Hk+1 (xk+1 ) denotes the cost of the base heuristic starting from state xk+1 .

We say that the base heuristic is sequentially improving, if for all xk and k, we have h

i

(2.29)

gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk ) ≤ Hk (xk ).

min uk ∈Uk (xk )

In words, the sequential improvement property (2.29) states that

Best heuristic Q-factor at xk ≤ Heuristic cost at xk .

(2.30)

To show that a sequentially improving heuristic yields policy improvement, simply note that from the calculation of Eq. (2.28), replacing the last two steps (that rely on sequential consistency) with Eq. (2.29), we have

Jk,π̃ (xk ) ≤ Hk (xk ),

for all xk and k.

Thus the rollout algorithm obtained with a sequentially improving base heuristic, will improve or at least will perform no worse than the base heuristic, from every starting state xk . Note that when the heuristic is sequentially consistent it is also sequentially improving, since in this case Eq.

(2.29) is satisfied with equality. This also follows from the interpretation

(2.30), since for a sequentially consistent heuristic, the heuristic cost is the

Q-factor of the heuristic at xk .

Empirically, it has been observed that the cost improvement obtained by rollout with a sequentially improving heuristic is typically considerable and often dramatic. Generally, however, it is hard to provide solid theoretical support for this observation. Several case studies support the consistently good performance of rollout (at least in the pure form described in this section); see the end of chapter references. The textbook [Ber17],

Section 6.4, provides some detailed worked-out examples. The price for the performance improvement is extra computation that is typically equal to the computation time of the base heuristic times a factor that is a low order polynomial of the problem size.

On the other hand the sequential improvement condition may not hold for a given base heuristic. It is thus important to know that any heuristic can be made to be sequentially improving with a simple modification, as we explain next.

The Fortified Rollout Algorithm

We will describe a variant of the rollout algorithm that implicitly uses a sequentially improving base heuristic, so that it has the sequential improvement property (2.29). This variant, called the fortified rollout algorithm, starts at x0 , and generates step-by-step a sequence of states

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

{x0 , x1 , . . . , xN } and corresponding sequence of controls. Upon reaching state xk it stores the trajectory

P k = {x0 , u0 , . . . , uk−1 , xk } that has been constructed up to stage k, called permanent trajectory, and it also stores a tentative trajectory

T k = {xk , uk , xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN −1 , xN } with corresponding cost

C(T k ) = gk (xk , uk )+gk+1 (xk+1 , uk+1 )+· · ·+gN −1 (xN −1 , uN −1 )+gN (xN ).

The tentative trajectory is such that P k ∪ T k is the best end-to-end trajectory computed up to stage k of the algorithm. Initially, T 0 is the trajectory generated by the base heuristic starting at the initial state x0 . The idea now is to deviate from the rollout algorithm at every state xk where the base heuristic produces a trajectory with larger cost than T k , and use T k instead.

In particular, upon reaching state xk , we run the rollout algorithm as earlier, i.e., for every uk ∈ Uk (xk ) and next state xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), we run the base heuristic from xk+1 , and find the control ũk that gives the best trajectory, denoted

T̃k = {xk , ũk , x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 , x̃N } with corresponding cost

C(T̃k ) = gk (xk , ũk )+gk+1 (x̃k+1 , ũk+1 )+· · ·+gN −1 (x̃N −1 , ũN −1 )+gN (x̃N ).

Whereas the ordinary rollout algorithm would choose control ũk and move to x̃k+1 , the fortified algorithm compares C(T k ) and C(T̃k ), and depending on which of the two is smaller, chooses uk or ũk and moves to xk+1 or to x̃k+1 , respectively. In particular, if C(T k ) ≤ C(T̃k ) the algorithm sets the next state and corresponding tentative trajectory to xk+1 = xk+1 ,

T k+1 = {xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN −1 , xN },

and if C(T k ) > C(T̃k ) it sets the next state and corresponding tentative trajectory to xk+1 = x̃k+1 ,

T k+1 = {x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 , x̃N }.

In other words the fortified rollout at xk follows the current tentative trajectory T k unless a lower cost trajectory T̃k is discovered by running the

Tentative trajectory T k

x0

xN

Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right x′N

+1 xk+1 u

-Factors Current State kx k

Nearest uk x Neighbor Heuristic Movex to the Right

Current

) . . . State xk k N k xk+1

Permanent trajectory P k

k ũk

Nearest

Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right k x̃k+1 x̃N

Figure 2.4.4 Schematic illustration of fortified rollout. After k steps, we have constructed the permanent trajectory

P k = {x0 , u0 , . . . , uk−1 , xk }, and the tentative trajectory

T k = {xk , uk , xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN−1 , xN } such that P k ∪ T k is the best end-to-end trajectory computed so far. We now run the rollout algorithm at xk , i.e., we find the control ũk that minimizes over uk the sum of gk (xk , uk ) plus the heuristic cost from the state xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), and the corresponding trajectory

T̃k = {xk , ũk , x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN−1 , x̃N }.

If the cost of the end-to-end trajectory P k ∪T̃k is lower than the cost of P k ∪T k , we use we add (ũk , x̃k+1 ) to the permanent trajectory and set the tentative trajectory to

T k+1 = {x̃k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN−1 , x̃N }.

Otherwise we add (uk , xk+1 ) to the permanent trajectory and set the tentative trajectory to

T k+1 = {xk+1 , uk+1 , . . . , uN−1 , xN }.

Note that the fortified rollout will produce a different result than the ordinary rollout if the heuristic when started from xk+1 constructs a trajectory that is different than the tail portion of the tentative trajectory that starts at xk+1 .

base heuristic from all possible next states xk+1 . It follows that at every state the trajectory that consists of the union of the permanent and the tentative trajectories, has lower cost than the initial tentative trajectory, which is the one produced by the base heuristic starting from x0 . Moreover, it can be seen that if the base heuristic is sequentially improving, the rollout algorithm and its fortified version coincide. Experimental evidence suggests that it is important to use the fortified version if the base heuristic is not sequentially improving.

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Finally we note that the fortified rollout may be viewed as the ordinary rollout algorithm applied to a modified version of the original problem and modified base heuristic that has the sequential improvement property.

The corresponding construction is somewhat tedious and will not be given;

we refer to [BTW97] and [Ber17], Section 6.4.2.

Using Multiple Heuristics

In many problems, several promising heuristics may be available. It is then possible to use all of these heuristics in the rollout framework. The idea is to construct a superheuristic, which selects the best trajectory produced by all the base heuristic trajectories. The superheuristic can then be used as the base heuristic for a rollout algorithm.

In particular, let us assume that we have M base heuristics, and that the mth of these, given a state xk+1 , produces a trajectory m = {x m m m

T̃k+1 k+1 , ũk+1 , . . . , ũN −1 , x̃N }, m ). The superheuristic then produces at x and corresponding cost C(T̃k+1 k+1 m for which C(T̃ m ) is minimum.

the trajectory T̃k+1 k+1

An interesting property, which can be readily verified by using the definitions, is that if all the base heuristics are sequentially improving, the same is true for the superheuristic. Moreover, there is a fortified version of the rollout algorithm, which has the property that it produces a trajectory with no worse cost than all the trajectories produced by the M base heuristics when started at the initial state x0 .

Rollout Algorithms with Multistep Lookahead

We may incorporate multistep lookahead into the deterministic rollout framework. To describe two-step lookahead in its most straightforward implementation, suppose that after k steps we have reached state xk . We then consider the set of all two-step-ahead states xk+2 we run the base heuristic starting from each of them, and compute the two-stage cost to get from xk to xk+2 , plus the cost of the base heuristic from xk+2 . We select the state, say x̃k+2 , that is associated with minimum cost, compute the controls ũk and ũk+1 that lead from xk to x̃k+2 , and choose ũk as the next rollout control and xk+1 = fk (xk , ũk ) as the next state; see Fig. 2.4.5.

The extension of the algorithm to lookahead of more than two steps is straightforward: instead of the two-step-ahead states xk+2 we run the base heuristic starting from all the possible ℓ-step ahead states xk+ℓ , etc.

For problems with a large number of stages, we can consider truncated rollout with terminal cost approximation. Here the rollout trajectories are obtained by running the base heuristic from the leaf nodes of the lookahead tree, and they are truncated after a given number of steps, while a terminal

Selective Depth Lookahead Tree

Truncated Rollout Terminal Cost Approximation

Truncated Rollout Terminal Cost Approximation J˜

Truncated Rollout Terminal Cost ApTruncated Rollout Terminal Cost Apxk

States xk+1 proximation

States xk+2

Figure 2.4.5 Illustration of truncated rollout with two-step lookahead and a

˜ The base heuristic is used for a limited terminal cost function approximation J.

number of steps and the terminal cost is added to compensate for the costs of the remaining steps.

cost approximation is added to the heuristic cost to compensate for the resulting error.

Among other variations of deterministic multistep rollout, let us mention a fortified version, which maintains a tentative trajectory, along the lines described earlier for the one-step lookahead case. In still another version of ℓ-step lookahead rollout, we may consider disregarding some of the states that are ℓ steps or less ahead, which are judged less promising according to some criterion (for example the costs of the base heuristic after a one-step lookahead); see Fig. 2.4.6. This may be viewed as selective depth lookahead , and aims to limit the number of times that the base heuristic is applied, which can become overwhelming as the length of lookahead is increased. We will encounter again the idea of selective depth lookahead in the context of stochastic rollout and Monte Carlo tree search (see the next section), where in addition to the length of lookahead, the accuracy of the simulation to evaluate the cost of the base heuristic is adapted to the results of earlier computations.

Finally, let us mention a variant of rollout that maintains multiple trajectories, extending from a given state xk to possibly multiple next states xk+1 . These states are the ones considered “most promising” based on the current results of the base heuristic (like being “ǫ-best”), but may be discarded later based on subsequent computations. Such extended forms

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

k

x1k+1 ,

+1

x2k+1

+1

x3k+1

+1

x4k+1

-Factors Current State x

. . .State xk x0 Current

Base Heuristic

Selective Depth Tree Projections of Leafs of the Tree

+1 States xN

Figure 2.4.6 Illustration of deterministic rollout with selective depth lookahead.

After k steps of the algorithm, we have a trajectory that starts at the initial state x0 and ends at state xk . We then generate the set of all possible next states

(states x1k+1 , x2k+1 , x3k+1 , x4k+1 in the figure). We “evaluate” these states using the base heuristic, and select some of them for “expansion,” i.e., we generate their next states xk+2 , evaluate them using the base heuristic, and continue. In the end we have a selective depth tree of next states, and the base heuristic costs from the leaves of the tree. The state xk+1 that corresponds to smallest overall cost is chosen by the selective depth lookahead rollout algorithm. For problems with a large number of stages, we can also truncate the rollout trajectories and add a terminal cost function approximation as compensation for the resulting error; cf.

Fig. 2.4.5.

of rollout are restricted to deterministic problems, and tend to be problemdependent. We will not consider them further in this book.

2.4.2

Stochastic Rollout and Monte Carlo Tree Search

We will now discuss the extension of the rollout algorithm to stochastic problems with a finite number of states. We will restrict ourselves to the case where the base heuristic is a policy π = {µ0 , . . . , µN −1 } (i.e., is sequentially consistent, in the context of deterministic problems). It is possible to consider more general rollout algorithms that involve base heuristics with

a sequential improvement property, but we will not pursue this idea, as it does not seem to have been applied so far in interesting stochastic contexts.

We first note that the cost improvement property that we showed for deterministic problems under the sequential consistency condition carries through for stochastic problems. In particular, let us denote by Jk,π (xk ) the cost corresponding to starting the base policy at state xk , and by Jk,π̃ (xk )

the cost corresponding to starting the rollout algorithm at state xk . We claim that

Jk,π̃ (xk ) ≤ Jk,π (xk ), for all xk and k.

We prove this inequality by induction similar to the deterministic case. Clearly it holds for k = N , since JN,π̃ = JN,π = gN . Assuming that it holds for index k + 1, we have for all xk ,

 n

o



Jk,π̃ (xk ) = E gk xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk + Jk+1,π̃ fk xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk n

o



≤ E gk xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk + Jk+1,π fk (xk , µ̃k (xk ), wk )

n

o

= min E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + Jk+1,π fk (xk , uk , wk )

uk ∈Uk (xk )

n

o



≤ E gk xk , µk (xk ), wk + Jk+1,π fk (xk , uk , wk )

= Jk,π (xk ),

where:

(a) The first equality is the DP equation for the rollout policy π̃.

(b) The first inequality holds by the induction hypothesis.

(c) The second equality holds by the definition of the rollout algorithm.

(d) The third equality is the DP equation for the policy π that corresponds to the base heuristic.

The induction proof of the cost improvement property (2.27) is thus complete.

Similar to deterministic problems, it has been observed empirically that for stochastic problems the rollout policy not only does not deteriorate the performance of the base policy, but also typically produces substantial cost improvement; see the case studies referenced at the end of the chapter.

Simulation-Based Implementation of the Rollout Algorithm

A conceptually straightforward way to compute the rollout control at a given state xk and time k is to consider each possible control uk ∈ Uk (xk )

and to generate a “large” number of simulated trajectories of the system starting from (xk , uk ). Thus a simulated trajectory has the form

 xi+1 = fi xi , µi (xi ), wi , i = k + 1, . . . , N − 1,

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

where {µk+1 , . . . , µN −1 } is the tail portion of the base policy, the first generated state is xk+1 = fk (xk , uk , wk ), and the disturbance sequences {wk , . . . , wN −1 } are independent random samples. The costs of the trajectories corresponding to a pair (xk , uk ) can be viewed as samples of the Q-factor n

o

Qk (xk , uk ) = E gk (xk , uk , wk ) + Jk+1,π̃ fk (xk , uk , wk ) ,

where Jk+1,π̃ is the cost-to-go function of the base policy, i.e., Jk+1,π̃ (xk+1 )

is the cost of using the base policy starting from xk+1 . For problems with a large number of stages, it is also common to truncate the rollout trajectories and add a terminal cost function approximation as compensation for the resulting error.

By Monte Carlo averaging of the costs of the sample trajectories plus the terminal cost (if any), we obtain an approximation to the Q-factor

Qk (xk , uk ) for each control uk ∈ Uk (xk ), which we denote by Q̃k (xk , uk ).

We then compute the (approximate) rollout control µ̃k (xk ) with the minimization

(2.31)

µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg min Q̃k (xk , uk ).

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Example 2.4.2 (Backgammon)

The first impressive application of rollout was given for the ancient two-player game of backgammon, in the paper by Tesauro and Galperin [TeG96]; see

Fig. 2.4.7. They implemented a rollout algorithm, which attained a level of play that was better than all computer backgammon programs, and eventually better than the best humans. Tesauro had proposed earlier the use of one-step and two-step lookahead with lookahead cost function approximation provided by a neural network, resulting in a backgammon program called TDGammon [Tes89a], [Tes89b], [Tes92], [Tes94], [Tes95], [Tes02]. TD-Gammon was trained with the use of the TD(λ) algorithm that will be discussed in

Section 4.9, and was used as the base heuristic (for both players) to simulate game trajectories. The rollout algorithm also involved truncation of long game trajectories, using a terminal cost function approximation based on TD-Gammon. Game trajectories are of course random, since they involve the use of dice at each player’s turn. Thus the scores of many trajectories have to be generated and Monte Carlo averaged to assess the probability of a win from a given position.

An important issue to consider here is that backgammon is a two-player game and not an optimal control problem that involves a single decision maker. While there is a DP theory for sequential zero-sum games, this theory has not been covered in this book. Thus how are we to interpret rollout algorithms in the context of two-player games? The answer is to treat the two players unequally: one player uses the heuristic policy exclusively (TDGammon in the present example). The other player takes the role of the

Possible Moves

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Figure 2.4.7 Illustration of rollout for backgammon. At a given position and roll of the dice, the set of all possible moves is generated, and the outcome of the game for each move is evaluated by “rolling out” (simulating to the end) many games using a suboptimal/heuristic backgammon player (the TDGammon player was used for this purpose in [TeG96]), and by Monte-Carlo averaging the scores. The move that results in the best average score is selected for play.

optimizer, and tries to improve on the heuristic policy (TD-Gammon) by using rollout. Thus “policy improvement” in the context of the present example means that when playing against a TD-Gammon opponent, the rollout player achieves a better score on the average than if he/she were to play with the

TD-Gammon strategy. In particular, the theory does not guarantee that a rollout player that is trained using TD-Gammon for both players will do better than TD-Gammon would against a non-TD-Gammon opponent. This is a plausible hypothesis, albeit one that can only be tested empirically.

Most of the currently existing computer backgammon programs descend from TD-Gammon. Rollout-based backgammon programs are the most powerful in terms of performance, consistent with the principle that a rollout algorithm performs better than its base heuristic. However, they are too time-consuming for real-time play, because of the extensive on-line simulation requirement at each move (the situation in backgammon is exacerbated by its high branching factor, i.e., for a given position, the number of possible successor positions is quite large, as compared for example with chess). They have been used in a limited diagnostic way to assess the quality of neural networkbased programs (many articles and empirical works on computer backgammon are posted on-line; see e.g., http://www.bkgm.com/articles/page07.html).

Monte Carlo Tree Search

In the rollout implementation just described, we implicitly assumed that once we reach state xk , we generate the same large number of trajectories starting from each pair (xk , uk ), with uk ∈ U (xk ), to the end of the horizon.

The drawback of this is threefold:

(a) The trajectories may be too long because the horizon length N is large (or infinite, in an infinite horizon context).

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

(b) Some of the controls uk may be clearly inferior to others, and may not be worth as much sampling effort.

(c) Some of the controls uk that appear to be promising, may be worth exploring better through multistep lookahead.

This has motivated variants, generally referred to as Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS for short), which aim to trade off computational economy with a hopefully small risk of degradation in performance. Variants of this type involve, among others, early discarding of controls deemed to be inferior based on the results of preliminary calculations, and simulation that is limited in scope (either because of a reduced number of simulation samples, or because of a shortened horizon of simulation, or both).

In particular, a simple remedy for (a) above is to use rollout trajectories of reasonably limited length, with some terminal cost approximation at the end (in an extreme case, the rollout may be skipped altogether, i.e., rollout trajectories have zero length). The terminal cost function may be very simple (such as zero) or may be obtained through some auxiliary calculation. In fact the base policy used for rollout may be the one that provides the terminal cost function approximation, as noted for the rollout-based backgammon algorithm of Example 2.4.2.

A simple but less straightforward remedy for (b) is to use some heuristic or statistical test to discard some of the controls uk , as soon as this is suggested by the early results of simulation. Similarly, to implement (c)

one may use some heuristic to increase the length of lookahead selectively for some of the controls uk . This is similar to the selective depth lookahead procedure for deterministic rollout that we illustrated in Fig. 2.4.6.

The MCTS approach can be based on sophisticated procedures for implementing and combining the ideas just described. The implementation is often adapted to the problem at hand, but the general idea is to use the interim results of the computation and statistical tests to focus the simulation effort along the most promising directions. Thus to implement

MCTS one needs to maintain a lookahead tree, which is expanded as the relevant Q-factors are evaluated by simulation, and which balances the competing desires of exploitation and exploration (generate and evaluate controls that seem most promising in terms of performance versus assessing the potential of inadequately explored controls). Ideas that were developed in the context of multiarmed bandit problems have played an important role in the construction of this type of MCTS procedures (see the end-ofchapter references).

Example 2.4.3 (Statistical Tests for Adaptive Sampling with a One-Step Lookahead)

Let us consider a typical one-step lookahead selection strategy that is based on adaptive sampling. We are at a state xk and we try to find a control ũk

Q1,n + R1,n

-Factors Current

CurrentState

Statex xk

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Q2,n + R2,n

Q3,n + R3,n

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Sample Q-Factors Simulation

Figure 2.4.8 Illustration of one-step lookahead MCTS at a state xk . The

Q-factor sampled next corresponds to the control i with minimum sum of exploitation index (here taken to be the running average Qi,n ) and exploration index (Ri,n , possibly given by the UCB rule).

that minimizes an approximate Q-factor

n

Q̃k (xk , uk ) = E gk (xk , u, wk ) + J˜k+1 fk (xk , u, wk )

o

over uk ∈ Uk (xk ), by averaging samples of Q̃k (xk , uk ). We assume that

Uk (xk ) contains m elements, which for simplicity are denoted 1, . . . , m. At the ℓth sampling period, knowing the outcomes of the preceding sampling periods, we select one of the m controls, say iℓ , and we draw a sample of

Q̃k (xk , iℓ ), whose value is denoted by Siℓ . Thus after the nth sampling period we have an estimate Qi,n of the Q-factor of each control i = 1, . . . , m that has been sampled at least once, given by

Pn δ(iℓ = i)Siℓ ℓ=1

Qi,n = P n ℓ=1

where

δ(iℓ = i) =

n

δ(iℓ = i)

if iℓ = i, if iℓ =

6 i.

Thus Qi,n is the empirical mean of the Q-factor of control i (total sample value divided by total number of samples), assuming that i has been sampled at least once.

After n samples have been collected, with each control sampled at least once, we may declare the control i that minimizes Qi,n as the “best” one, i.e., the one that truly minimizes the Q-factor Qk (xk , i). However, there is a positive probability that there is an error: the selected control may not minimize the true Q-factor. In adaptive sampling, roughly speaking, we want to design the sample selection strategy and the criterion to stop the sampling, in a way that keeps the probability of error small (by allocating some sampling effort to all controls), and the number of samples limited (by not wasting samples on controls i that appear inferior based on their empirical mean

Qi,n ).

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

Intuitively, a good sampling policy will balance at time n the desires of exploitation and exploration (i.e., sample controls that seem most promising, in the sense that they have a small running average Qi,n , versus assessing the potential of inadequately explored controls, those i that have been sampled a small number of times). Thus it makes sense to sample next the control i that minimizes the sum

Ti,n + Ri,n of two indexes: an exploitation index Ti,n and an exploration index Ri,n .

Usually the exploitation index is chosen to be the empirical mean Qi,n . The exploration index is based an a confidence interval formula and depends on the sample count si =

n

X

δ(iℓ = i)

ℓ=1

of control i. A frequently suggested choice is the UCB rule (upper confidence bound), which sets

r

Ri,n = −c

log n

, si

where c is a positive constant that is selected empirically (some analysis sug√ gests values near c = 2, assuming that Qi,n is normalized to take values in the range [−1, 0]). The UCB rule, first proposed in the paper [ACF02], has been extensively discussed in the literature both for one-step and for multistep lookahead [where it is called UCT (UCB applied to trees; see [KoS16])]. Its justification is based on probabilistic analyses that relate to the multiarmed bandit problem, and is beyond our scope.

Sampling policies for MCTS with multistep lookahead are based on similar sampling ideas to the case of one-step lookahead. A simulated trajectory is run from a node i of the lookahead tree that minimizes the sum Ti,n + Ri,n of an exploitation index and an exploration index. There are many schemes of this type, but the details are beyond our scope (see the end-of-chapter references).

A major success has been the use of MCTS in two-player game contexts, such as the AlphaGo computer program (Silver et al. [SHM16]), which performs better than the best humans in the game of Go. This program integrates several of the techniques discussed in this chapter, and in

Chapters 3 and 4, including MCTS and rollout using a base policy that is trained off-line using a deep neural network. We will discuss neural network training techniques in Chapter 3. The AlphaZero program, which has performed spectacularly well against humans and other programs in the games of Go and chess (Silver et al. [SHS17]), bears some similarity with AlphaGo, and critically relies on MCTS, but does not use rollout.

Randomized Policy Improvement by MCTS

We have described rollout and MCTS as schemes for policy improvement:

start with a base policy, and compute an improved policy based on the results of one-step lookahead or multistep lookahead followed by simulation with the base policy. We have implicitly assumed that both the base policy and the rollout policy are deterministic in the sense that they map each state xk into a unique control µ̃k (xk ) [cf. Eq. (2.31)]. In some contexts, success has been achieved with randomized policies, which map a state xk to a probability distribution over the set of controls Uk (xk ), rather than mapping onto a single control. In particular, the AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs use MCTS to generate and use for training purposes randomized policies, which specify at each board position the probabilities with which the various moves are selected.

A randomized policy can be used as a base policy in exactly the same way as a deterministic policy: for a given state xk , we just generate sample trajectories and associated sample Q-factors, starting from each leaf-state of the lookahead tree that is rooted at xk . We then average the corresponding Q-factor samples. However, the rollout/improved policy, as we have described it, is a deterministic policy, i.e., it applies at xk the control µ̃k (xk ) that is “best” according to the results of the rollout [cf. Eq.

(2.31)]. Still, however, if we wish to generate an improved policy that is randomized, we can simply change the probabilities of different controls in the direction of the deterministic rollout policy. This can be done by increasing the probability of the “best” control µ̃k (xk ) from its base policy level, while decreasing the probabilities of the other controls.

The use of MCTS provides a related method to “improve” a randomized policy. In the process of adaptive simulation that is used in MCTS, we generate frequency counts of the different controls, i.e., the proportion of rollout trajectories associated each uk ∈ Uk (xk ). We can then obtain the rollout randomized policy by moving the probabilities of the base policy in the direction suggested by the frequency counts, i.e., increase the probability of high-count controls and reduce the probability of the others. This type of policy improvement is reminiscent of gradient-type methods, and has been successful in a number of applications; see Section 4.11 for further discussion, and the end-of-chapter references for such policy improvement implementations in AlphaGo, AlphaZero, and other application contexts.

Variance Reduction in Rollout - Comparing Advantages

When using simulation, sampling is often organized to effect variance reduction. By this we mean that for a given problem, the collection and use of samples is structured so that the variance of the simulation error is made smaller, with the same amount of simulation effort. There are several

Sec. 2.4

Rollout

methods of this type for which we refer to textbooks on simulation (see, e.g., Ross [Ros12], Rubinstein and Kroese [RuK17]).

In this section we discuss a method to reduce the effects of the simulation error in the calculation of the Q-factors in the context of rollout.

The key idea is that the selection of the rollout control depends on the values of the Q-factor differences

Q̃k (xk , uk ) − Q̃k (xk , ûk )

for all pairs of controls (uk , ûk ). These values must be computed accurately, so that the controls uk and ûk can be accurately compared. On the other hand, the simulation/approximation errors in the computation of the individual Q-factors Q̃k (xk , uk ) may be magnified through the preceding differencing operation.

An alternative approach is possible in the case where the probability distribution of each disturbance wk does not depend on xk and uk .

In this case, we may approximate by simulation the Q-factor difference

Q̃k (xk , uk ) − Q̃k (xk , ûk ) by sampling the difference

Ck (xk , uk , wk ) − Ck (xk , ûk , wk ), where wk = (wk , wk+1 , . . . , wN −1 ) and

Ck (xk , uk , wk ) = gN (xN ) + gk (xk , uk , wk ) +

N

−1

X

i=k+1

 gi xi , µi (xi ), wi ,

where {µk+1 , . . . , µN −1 } is the tail portion of the base policy.

This approximation may be far more accurate than the one obtained by differencing independent samples Ck (xk , uk , wk ) and Ck (xk , ûk , ŵk ). Indeed, by introducing the zero mean sample errors

Dk (xk , uk , wk ) = Ck (xk , uk , wk ) − Q̃k (xk , uk ), it can be seen that the variance of the error in estimating Q̃k (xk , uk ) −

Q̃k (xk , ûk ) with the former method will be smaller than with the latter method if and only if

Ewk , ŵk

n

o

Dk (xk , uk , wk ) − Dk (xk , ûk , ŵk )

n o

> Ewk Dk (xk , uk , wk ) − Dk (xk , ûk , wk )

,

or equivalently



E Dk (xk , uk , wk )Dk (xk , ûk , wk ) > 0;

(2.32)

i.e., if and only if the correlation between the errors Dk (xk , uk , wk ) and

Dk (xk , ûk , wk ) is positive. A little thought should convince the reader that this property is likely to hold in many types of problems. Roughly speaking, the relation (2.32) holds if changes in the value of uk (at the first stage) have little effect on the value of the error Dk (xk , uk , wk ) relative to the effect induced by the randomness of wk . To see this, suppose that there exists a scalar γ < 1 such that, for all xk , uk , and ûk , there holds

E

n

Dk (xk , uk , wk ) − Dk (xk , ûk , wk )

o

≤ γE

n

Dk (xk , uk , wk )

o

.

(2.33)

Then we have

Dk (xk , uk , wk )Dk (xk , ûk , wk )

= Dk (xk , uk , wk )



+ Dk (xk , uk , wk ) Dk (xk , ûk , wk ) − Dk (xk , uk , wk )

≥ Dk (xk , uk , wk )

− Dk (xk , uk , wk ) · Dk (xk , ûk , wk ) − Dk (xk , uk , wk ) , from which we obtain



E Dk (xk ,uk , wk )Dk (xk , ûk , wk )

n o

≥ E Dk (xk , uk , wk )

n o

− E Dk (xk , uk , wk ) · Dk (xk , ûk , wk ) − Dk (xk , uk , wk )

o n o 1 n

≥ E Dk (xk , uk , wk )

− E Dk (xk , uk , wk )

o

1 n

− E Dk (xk , ûk , wk ) − Dk (xk , uk , wk )

o

1−γ n

≥

E Dk (xk , uk , wk )

, where for the first inequality we use the generic relation ab ≥ a2 −|a|·|b−a| for two scalars a and b, for the second inequality we use the generic relation

|a| · |b| ≥ − 12 (a2 + b2 ) for two scalars a and b, and for the third inequality we use Eq. (2.33).

Thus, under the assumption (2.33) and the assumption

E

n

Dk (xk , uk , wk )

o

> 0,

the condition (2.32) holds and guarantees that by averaging cost difference samples rather than differencing (independently obtained) averages of cost samples, the simulation error variance decreases.

Sec. 2.5

On-Line Rollout for Deterministic Infinite-Spaces Problems

Let us finally note the potential benefit of using Q-factor differences in contexts other than rollout. In particular when approximating Q-factors

Qk (xk , uk ) using parametric architectures (Section 3.4 in the next chapter), it may be important to approximate and compare instead the differences

Ak (xk , uk ) = Qk (xk , uk ) −

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Qk (xk , uk ).

The function Ak (xk , uk ) is also known as the advantage of the pair (xk , uk ), and can serve just as well as Qk (xk , uk ) for the purpose of comparing controls, but may work better Qk (xk , uk ) in the presence of approximation errors. This question is discussed further in Section 3.4.

2.5 ON-LINE ROLLOUT FOR DETERMINISTIC INFINITESPACES PROBLEMS - OPTIMIZATION HEURISTICS

We have considered so far discrete-spaces applications of rollout, where the relevant Q-factors at each state xk are evaluated by simulation and compared by exhaustive comparison. To implement this approach in a continuous-spaces setting, the control constraint set must first be discretized, which is often inconvenient and ineffective. In this section we will discuss an alternative approach for deterministic problems that can deal with an infinite number of controls and Q-factors at xk without discretization. The idea is to use a base heuristic that involves a continuous optimization, and to rely on a nonlinear programming method to solve the corresponding lookahead optimization problem.

To get a sense of the basic idea, consider the one-step lookahead rollout minimization µ̃k (xk ) ∈ arg

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )

Q̃k (xk , uk ),

(2.34)

where Q̃k (xk , uk ) is the approximate Q-factor



Q̃k (xk , uk ) = gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk , uk ) ,

(2.35)

with Hk+1 (xk+1 ) being the cost of the base heuristic starting from state xk+1 [cf. Eq. (2.25)]. Suppose that we have a differentiable closed-form expression for Hk+1 , and the functions gk and fk are known and are differentiable with respect to uk . Then the Q-factor Q̃k (xk , uk ) of Eq. (2.35) is also differentiable with respect to uk , and its minimization (2.34) may be addressed with one of the many gradient-based methods that are available for differentiable unconstrained and constrained optimization.

The preceding approach requires that the heuristic cost Hk+1 (xk+1 )

be available in closed form, which is highly restrictive, but this difficulty can

Next Cities

NextSimulation

States

Sample

Q-Factors

Control 1 States

Sample Q-Factors Simulation k xk+1 Control 1 States xk+ℓ

-Factors Current State x

Control

1)-Stages Base Heuristic Minimization

Current State xk

Control u k

1)-Stages Base Heuristic

Minimization

,n

Stage k

k Stages

Stages k + 1, . . . , k + ℓ − 1

Figure 2.5.1 Schematic illustration of rollout for a deterministic problem with infinite control spaces. The base heuristic is an (ℓ − 1)-stage deterministic optimal control problem, which together with the kth stage minimization over uk ∈

Uk (xk ), seamlessly forms an ℓ-stage continuous spaces optimal control/nonlinear programming problem that starts at state xk .

be circumvented by using a base heuristic that is itself based on multistep optimization. In particular, suppose that Hk+1 (xk+1 ) is the optimal cost of some (ℓ − 1)-stage deterministic optimal control problem that is related to the original problem. Then the rollout algorithm (2.34)-(2.35) can be implemented by solving the ℓ-stage deterministic optimal control problem, which seamlessly concatenates the first stage minimization over uk [cf. Eq.

(2.34)], with the (ℓ − 1)-stage minimization of the base heuristic; see Fig.

2.5.1. This ℓ-stage problem may be solvable on-line by standard continuous spaces nonlinear programming or optimal control methods. An important example of methods of this type arises in control system design and is discussed next.

2.5.1

Model Predictive Control

We will consider a classical control problem, where the objective is to keep the state of a deterministic system close to the origin of the state space or close to a given trajectory. This problem has a long history, and has been addressed by a variety of sophisticated methods. Starting in the late

50s and early 60s, approaches based on state variable system representations and optimal control became popular. The linear-quadratic approach, which we have illustrated by example in Section 1.3.7, was developed during this period, and is still used extensively. Unfortunately, however, linear-

Sec. 2.5

Rollout for Deterministic Infinite-Spaces Problems

Figure 2.5.2 Illustration of constrained motion of a robot from point A to point

B. There are state (position/velocity) constraints, and control (acceleration) constraints. When there are mobile obstacles, the state constraints may change unpredictably, necessitating on-line replanning.

quadratic models are often not satisfactory. There are two main reasons for this:

(a) The system may be nonlinear, and it may be inappropriate to use for control purposes a model that is linearized around the desired point or trajectory.

(b) There may be control and/or state constraints, which are not handled adequately through quadratic penalty terms in the cost function. For example, the motion of a robot may be constrained by the presence of obstacles and hardware limitations (see Fig. 2.5.2). The solution obtained from a linear-quadratic model may not be suitable for such a problem, because quadratic penalties treat constraints “softly” and may produce trajectories that violate the constraints.

These inadequacies of the linear-quadratic model have motivated a methodology, called model predictive control (MPC for short), which combines elements of several ideas that we have discussed so far: multistep lookahead, rollout with infinite control spaces, and certainty equivalence.

Aside from resolving the difficulty with infinitely many Q-factors at xk , while dealing adequately with state and control constraints, MPC is wellsuited for on-line replanning, like all rollout methods.

We will focus primarily on the most common form of MPC, where the system is either deterministic, or else it is stochastic, but it is replaced with a deterministic version by using typical values in place of the uncertain quantities, similar to the certainty equivalent control approach. Moreover we will consider the case where the objective is to keep the state close to the origin; this is called the regulation problem. Similar approaches have been developed for the problem of maintaining the state of a nonstationary

system along a given state trajectory, and also, with appropriate modifications, to control problems involving disturbances.

In particular, we will consider a deterministic system xk+1 = fk (xk , uk ), whose state xk and control uk are vectors that consist of a finite number of scalar components. The cost per stage is assumed nonnegative gk (xk , uk ) ≥ 0,

for all (xk , uk ),

(e.g., a quadratic cost). We impose state and control constraints xk ∈ Xk ,

uk ∈ Uk (xk ),

k = 0, 1, . . . .

We also assume that the system can be kept at the origin at zero cost, i.e., fk (0, uk ) = 0,

gk (0, uk ) = 0

for some control uk ∈ Uk (0).

(2.36)

For a given initial state x0 ∈ X0 , we want to obtain a sequence {u0 , u1 , . . .} such that the states and controls of the system satisfy the state and control constraints with small total cost.

The MPC Algorithm

Let us describe the MPC algorithm for the deterministic problem just described. At the current state xk :

(a) MPC solves an ℓ-step lookahead version of the problem, which requires that xk+ℓ = 0.

(b) If {ũk , . . . , ũk+ℓ−1 } is the optimal control sequence of this problem,

MPC applies ũk and discards the other controls ũk+1 , . . . , ũk+ℓ−1 .

(c) At the next stage, MPC repeats this process, once the next state xk+1 is revealed.

In particular, at the typical stage k and state xk ∈ Xk , the MPC algorithm solves an ℓ-stage optimal control problem involving the same cost function and the requirement xk+ℓ = 0. This is the problem min

ui , i=k,...,k+ℓ−1

k+ℓ−1

X

gi (xi , ui ),

i=k

subject to the system equation constraints xi+1 = fi (xi , ui ),

i = k, . . . , k + ℓ − 1,

(2.37)

Sec. 2.5

Rollout for Deterministic Infinite-Spaces Problems

the state and control constraints xi ∈ Xi ,

ui ∈ Ui (xi ),

i = k, . . . , k + ℓ − 1,

and the terminal state constraint xk+ℓ = 0.

Let {ũk , ũk+1 , . . . , ũk+ℓ−1 } be a corresponding optimal control sequence.

The MPC algorithm applies at stage k the first component ũk of this sequence, and discards the remaining components; see Fig. 2.5.3.†

To guarantee that there is an integer ℓ such that the preceding MPC algorithm is feasible, we assume the following.

Constrained Controllability Condition

There exists an integer ℓ > 1 such that for every initial state xk ∈

Xk , we can find a sequence of controls uk , . . . , uk+ℓ−1 that drive to

0 the state xk+ℓ of the system at time k + ℓ, while satisfying all the intermediate state and control constraints uk ∈ Uk (xk ), xk+1 ∈ Xk+1 , . . . , xk+ℓ−1 ∈ Xk+ℓ−1 , uk+ℓ−1 ∈ Uk+ℓ−1 (xk+ℓ−1 ).

Finding an integer ℓ that satisfies the constrained controllability condition is an important issue to which we will return later.† Generally the constrained controllability condition tends to be satisfied if the control constraints are not too stringent, and the state constraints do not allow a large deviation from the origin. In this case not only we can implement MPC, but also the resulting closed-loop system will tend to be stable; see the following discussion of stability, and Example 2.5.2.

Note that the actual state trajectory produced by MPC may never reach the origin (see the subsequent Example 2.5.1). This is because we use only the first control ũk of the kth stage sequence {ũk , ũk+1 , . . . , ũk+ℓ−1 },

† In the case, where we want the system to follow a given nominal trajectory, rather than stay close to the origin, we should modify the MPC optimization to impose as a terminal constraint that the state xk+ℓ should be a point on the nominal trajectory (instead of xk+ℓ = 0). We should also change the cost function to reflect a penalty for deviating from the given trajectory.

† In the case where we want the system to follow a given nominal trajectory, rather than stay close to the origin, we may want to use a time-dependent lookahead length ℓk , to exercise tighter control over critical parts of the nominal trajectory.

Next Cities Next States k xk+1

-Factors Current

State x

Sample

Q-Factors

Simulation Control 1 State

Sample Q-Factors Simulation Control 1 State xk+ℓ = 0

(ℓ − 1)-Stages

Base

Sample Q-Factors

Simulation

2 Control

3 Heuristic Minimization

Current State xk Control 1k Control uk x

1)-Stages Base Heuristic

Minimization

,n

Stage k

k Stages

Stages k + 1, . . . , k + ℓ − 1

Figure 2.5.3 Illustration of the problem solved by MPC at state xk . We minimize the cost function over the next ℓ stages while imposing the requirement that xk+ℓ = 0. We then apply the first control of the optimizing sequence.

which aims at xk+ℓ = 0. At the next stage k + 1 the control generated by

MPC may be different than ũk+1 , because it will aim one step further to the terminal condition xk+ℓ+1 = 0.

To make the connection of MPC with rollout, we note that the onestep lookahead function J˜ implicitly used by MPC [cf. Eq. (2.37)] is the cost-to-go function of a certain base heuristic. This is the heuristic that drives to 0 the state after ℓ−1 stages (not ℓ stages) and keeps the state at 0 thereafter, while observing the state and control constraints, and minimizing the associated (ℓ − 1) stages cost, in the spirit of our earlier discussion;

cf. Fig. 2.5.1.

Sequential Improvement Property and Stability Analysis

It turns out that the base heuristic just described is sequentially improving, so MPC has a cost improvement property, of the type discussed in Section

2.4.1. To see this, let us denote by Jˆk (xk ) the optimal cost of the ℓ-stage problem solved by MPC when at a state xk ∈ Xk . Let also Hk (xk ) and

Hk+1 (xk+1 ) be the optimal heuristic costs of the corresponding (ℓ − 1)stage optimization problems that start at xk and xk+1 , and drive the states xk+ℓ−1 and xk+ℓ , respectively, to 0. Thus, by the principle of optimality, we have the DP equation

Jˆk (xk ) =

min

uk ∈Uk (xk )



 gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk .uk ) .

Sec. 2.5

Rollout for Deterministic Infinite-Spaces Problems

Since having one less stage at our disposal to drive the state to 0 cannot decrease the optimal cost, we have

Jˆk (xk ) ≤ Hk (xk ).

By combining the preceding two relations, we obtain



 gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 fk (xk .uk ) ≤ Hk (xk ), min uk ∈Uk (xk )

(2.38)

which is the sequential improvement condition for the base heuristic [cf.

Eq. (2.29)].†

Often the primary objective in MPC, aside from fulfilling the state and control constraints, is to obtain a stable closed-loop system, i.e., a system that naturally tends to stay close to the origin. This is typically expressed adequately by the requirement of a finite cost over an infinite number of stages:

∞

X gk (xk , uk ) < ∞,

(2.39)

k=0

where {x0 , u0 , x1 , u1 , . . .} is the state and control sequence generated by

MPC.

We will now show that the stability condition (2.39) is satisfied by the MPC algorithm. Indeed, from the sequential improvement condition

(2.38), we have gk (xk , uk ) + Hk+1 (xk+1 ) ≤ Hk (xk ),

k = 0, 1, . . . .

(2.40)

Adding this relation for all k in a range [0, K], where K = 0, 1, . . ., we obtain

K

X

HK+1 (xK+1 ) + gk (xk , uk ) ≤ H0 (x0 ).

k=0

Since HK+1 (xK+1 ) ≥ 0, it follows that

K

X

gk (xk , uk ) ≤ H0 (x0 ),

K = 0, 1, . . . ,

(2.41)

k=0

and taking the limit as K → ∞,

∞

X

gk (xk , uk ) ≤ H0 (x0 ) < ∞,

k=0

[H0 (x0 ) is finite because the transfer from x0 to xℓ = 0 is feasible by the constrained controllability condition]. We have thus verified the stability condition (2.39).

† Note that the base heuristic is not sequentially consistent, as it fails to satisfy the definition given in Section 2.4.1 (see the subsequent Example 2.5.1).

Example 2.5.1

Consider a scalar linear system and a quadratic cost gk (xk , uk ) = x2k + u2k ,

xk+1 = xk + uk ,

where the state and control constraints are





xk ∈ Xk = x | |x| ≤ 1.5 ,

uk ∈ Uk (xk ) = u | |u| ≤ 1 .

We apply the MPC algorithm with ℓ = 2. For this value of ℓ, the constrained controllability assumption is satisfied, since the 2-step sequence of controls u0 = −sgn(x0 ),

u1 = −x1 = −x0 + sgn(x0 )

drives the state x2 to 0, for any x0 with |x0 | ≤ 1.5.

At state xk ∈ Xk , MPC minimizes the two-stage cost x2k + u2k + (xk + uk )2 + u2k+1 , subject to the control constraints

|uk | ≤ 1,

|uk+1 | ≤ 1,

and the state constraints

|xk+1 | ≤ 1.5,

xk+2 = xk + uk + uk+1 = 0.

This is a quadratic programming problem, which can be solved with available software, and in this case analytically, because of its simplicity. In particular, it can be verified that the minimization yields ũk = − xk ,

ũk+1 = −(xk + ũk ).

Thus the MPC algorithm selects ũk = − 32 xk , which results in the closed-loop system k = 0, 1, . . . .

xk+1 = xk ,

Note that while this closed-loop system is stable, its state is never driven to 0 if started from x0 6= 0. Moreover, it is easily verified that the base heuristic is not sequentially consistent. For example, starting from xk = 1, the base heuristic generates the sequence xk = 1, uk = − , xk+1 = , uk+1 = − , xk+2 = 0, uk+2 = 0, . . . ,

n

while starting from the next state xk+1 =

n

xk+1 =

o

it generates the sequence

, uk+1 = − , xk+2 = , uk+2 = − , xk+3 = 0, uk+3 = 0, . . . ,

o

Sec. 2.5

Rollout for Deterministic Infinite-Spaces Problems

so the sequential consistency condition of Section 2.4.1 is violated.

Regarding the choice of the horizon length ℓ for the MPC calculations, note that if the constrained controllability assumption is satisfied for some value of ℓ, it is also satisfied for all larger values of ℓ. This argues for a large value of ℓ. On the other hand, the optimal control problem solved at each stage by MPC becomes larger and hence more difficult as ℓ increases. Thus, the horizon length is usually chosen on the basis of some experimentation: first ensure that ℓ is large enough for the constrained controllability assumption to hold, and then by further experimentation to ensure overall satisfactory performance.

2.5.2 Target Tubes and the Constrained Controllability

Condition

We now return to the constrained controllability condition, which asserts that the state constraint sets Xk are such that starting from anywhere within it, it is possible to drive to 0 the state of the system within some number of steps ℓ, while staying within Xm at each intermediate step m = k + 1, . . . , m = k + ℓ − 1. Unfortunately, this assumption masks some major complications. In particular, the control constraint set may not be sufficiently rich to compensate for natural instability tendencies of the system. As a result it may be impossible to keep the state within Xk over a sufficiently long period of time, something that may be viewed as a form of instability. Here is an example.

Example 2.5.2

Consider the scalar linear system xk+1 = 2xk + uk , which is unstable, and the control constraint

|uk | ≤ 1.

Then if 0 ≤ x0 < 1, it can be seen that by using the control u0 = −1, the next state satisfies, x1 = 2x0 − 1 < x0 , and is closer to 0 than the preceding state x0 . Similarly, using controls uk =

−1, every subsequent state xk+1 will get closer to 0 that xk . Eventually, after a sufficient number of steps k̄, with controls uk = −1 for k < k̄, the state xk̄ will satisfy

0 ≤ xk̄ ≤ .

Once this happens, the feasible control uk̄ = −2xk̄ will drive the state xk̄+1 to 0.

−1 must be reachable Largest reachable tube

0k

ℓ−1

Figure 2.5.4 Illustration of state trajectories under MPC for Example 2.5.2. If the initial state lies within the set (−1, 1) the constrained controllability condition is satisfied for sufficiently large ℓ, and the MPC algorithm yields a stable controller.

If the initial state lies outside this set, MPC cannot be implemented because the constrained controllability condition fails to holds. Moreover, the system is unstable starting from such aninitial state. In this example, the largest reachable tube is {X, X, . . .} with X = x | |x| ≤ 1 .

Similarly, when −1 < x0 ≤ 0, by applying control uk = 1 for a sufficiently large number of steps k̄, the state xk̄ will be driven into the region

[−1/2, 0], and then the feasible control uk̄ = −2xk̄ will drive the state xk̄+1 to 0.

Suppose now that the control constraint is |uk | ≤ 1 and the state constraint is of the form Xk = [−β, β] for all k, and let us explore what happens for different values of β. The preceding discussion shows that if 0 < β < 1 the constrained controllability assumption is satisfied, and for every state initial state x0 ∈ X0 the state can be kept within Xk and can be driven to 0 in a finite number ℓ of steps. The number ℓ depends on β, and in particular if

0 < β < 1/2, ℓ can be taken equal to 1.

On the other hand, if β ≥ 1, it is impossible to drive the state to 0 from every initial state x0 ∈ [1, β] without violating the constraint |uk | ≤ 1, so the constrained controllability assumption is violated. In fact if the initial state satisfies |x0 | > 1, the state trajectory diverges in the sense that |xk | → ∞ for any control sequence that satisfies the constraint |uk | ≤ 1; see Fig. 2.5.4.

Thus if β ≥ 1, either a larger control constraint set or an initial condition that is close to 0, or both, are needed to satisfy the constrained controllability condition and to improve the stability properties of the closed-loop system.

The critical construction in the preceding example is to identify sets of states X k ⊂ Xk such that starting from within X k we are guaranteed to stay within the “tube” {X k+1 , X k+2 , . . . , X N } for all subsequent times with appropriate choices of control. Tubes of this type can serve as state constraints in MPC. Moreover, when the sets X k are bounded, a guarantee

Sec. 2.5

Rollout for Deterministic Infinite-Spaces Problems

that the state can stay within the tube amounts to a form of closed-loop stability guarantee. In the remainder if this section, we will address the issue of how such tubes can be constructed.

Formally, a tube {X 0 , X 1 , . . . , X N } is just a sequence of subsets with

X k ⊂ Xk for all k = 0, . . . , N . The tube is called reachable if it has the property that for every k and xk ∈ X k there exists a uk ∈ Uk (xk ) such that fk (xk , uk ) ∈ X k+1 . A reachable tube was also called an effective target tube in [Ber71], and for simplicity it will be called a target tube in this section; the latter name is widely used in the current literature.† If the original tube of state constraints {X0 , X1 , . . . , XN } is not reachable, the constrained controllability condition cannot be satisfied, since then there will be states outside the tube starting from which we can never reenter the tube. In this case, it is necessary to compute a reachable tube to use as a set of state constraints in place of the original tube {X0 , X1 , . . . , XN }.

Thus obtaining a reachable tube is a prerequisite towards satisfying the constrained controllability assumption, and serves as the first step in the analysis and design of MPC schemes with state constraints.

Given an N -stage deterministic problem with state constraints xk ∈

Xk , k = 0, . . . , N , we can obtain a reachable tube {X 0 , X 1 , . . . , X N } by a recursive algorithm that starts with

X N = XN , and generates X k , k = 0, . . . , N − 1, going backwards,



X k = xk ∈ Xk | for some uk ∈ Uk (xk ) we have fk (xk , uk ) ∈ X k+1 .

Generally, it is difficult to compute the sets X k of the reachable tube, but algorithms that produce inner approximations have been constructed. The author’s thesis [Ber71] and subsequent papers [BeR71], [Ber72], [BeR73],

[Ber07], gave inner ellipsoidal approximations for both finite and infinite horizon problems with perfect and partial state information, which involve linear systems and ellipsoidal constraints. Other authors have developed polyhedral approximations; see the textbook by Borelli, Bemporad, and

Morari [BBM17].

† The concept of target tubes and reachability in discrete-time systems was introduced in the author’s 1971 Ph.D. thesis ([Ber71], available on-line) and associated papers [BeR71], [Ber72], [BeR73], where various methods for constructing target tubes were given, for both deterministic and minimax/game problems, including easily characterized ellipsoids for linear systems. Reachability can be defined for finite horizon as well as infinite horizon problems. Reachability concepts were studied by several authors much later, particularly in the context of

MPC, and have been generalized to continuous-time systems (see the end-ofchapter references).

Example 2.5.2 (continued)

Here if the state constraints are



k = 0, 1, . . . , N,



k = 0, 1, . . . , N.



k = 0, 1, . . . , N.

Xk = xk | |xk | ≤ 1 ,

(2.42)

the tube {Xk | k = 0, . . . , N } is reachable for any N . However, this is not true for the constraint sets

Xk = xk | |xk | ≤ 2 ,

For example for x0 = 2 the next state x1 = 2x0 + uk = 4 + uk will not satisfy |x1 | ≤ 2 for any of the feasible controls uk with |uk | ≤ 1. Thus it is necessary to replace the tube of original constraints {Xk | k = 0, . . . , N } with a reachable tube {X k | k = 0, . . . , N }. It can be verified that the largest tube that is reachable for any value of N is the one with

X k = xk | |xk | ≤ 1 ,

Calculating a reachable tube is relatively easy for one-dimensional problems, but becomes complicated for multidimensional problems, where approximations are required in general.

Finally, let us consider the case of the quadratic cost per stage gk (xk , uk ) = x2k + u2k , and MPC implemented with ℓ = 2. As noted earlier, in order for the MPC minimizations to be feasible for ℓ = 2, the initial condition must satisfy

|x0 | ≤ 1. A calculation very similar to the one of Example 2.5.1 shows that

MPC applies at time k the control ũk = −(5/3)xk . The state of the closedloop system evolves according to xk+1 =

xk ,

and tends to 0 asymptotically.

Note that there is a subtle difference between reachability of the tube

{Xk | k = 0, . . . , N } and satisfying the constrained controllability condition. The latter implies the former, but the converse is not true, as the preceding example illustrates. In particular, if Xk is given by Eq. (2.42), the tube is reachable, but the constrained controllability assumption is not satisfied because starting at the boundary of Xk , we cannot drive the state to 0 in any number of steps, using controls uk with |uk | ≤ 1. By contrast, if we remove from Xk the boundary points 1 and -1, the tube is still reachable while the constrained controllability condition is satisfied. Generally, except for boundary effects of this type, tube reachability typically implies the constrained controllability condition.

Sec. 2.5

2.5.3

Rollout for Deterministic Infinite-Spaces Problems

Variants of Model Predictive Control

The MPC scheme that we have described is just the starting point for a broad methodology with many variations, which often relate to the suboptimal control methods that we have discussed so far in this chapter. For example, in the problem solved by MPC at each stage, instead of the requirement of driving the system state to 0 in ℓ steps, one may use a large penalty for the state being nonzero after ℓ steps. Then, the preceding analysis goes through, as long as the terminal penalty is chosen so that the sequential improvement condition (2.38) is satisfied.

In another variant, instead of aiming to drive the state to 0 after ℓ steps, one aims to reach a sufficiently small neighborhood of the origin, within which a stabilizing controller, designed by other methods, may be used.

We finally mention variants of MPC methods, which combine rollout and terminal cost function approximation, and which can deal with uncertainty and system disturbances. A method of this type will be described in

Section 4.6.1 in the context of infinite horizon problems, but can be adapted to finite horizon problems as well; see also the end-of-chapter references.

As an illustration, let us provide an example of a scheme that combines MPC with certainty equivalent control ideas (cf. Section 2.3.2).

Example 2.5.3 (MPC for Stochastic Systems and Certainty

Equivalent Approximation)

Consider the stochastic system xk+1 = fk (xk , uk , wk ), with the expected cost of a policy π = {µ0 , . . . , µN−1 } starting at x0 defined by

(

)

N−1

Jπ (x0 ) = E

gN (xN ) +

X

g xk , µk (xk ), wk

k=0



;

cf. the framework of Section 1.2. We assume that for all k, there are state and control constraints of the form xk ∈ Xk ,

uk ∈ Uk (xk ),

and that the stochastic disturbances wk take values within some known set

Wk .

An important characteristic of this problem is that a policy must maintain reachability of the tube {X0 , X1 , . . .}, even under worst-case disturbance values. For this it is necessary that for each state xk ∈ Xk , the control uk is chosen from within the subset Ũk (xk ) given by



Ũk (xk ) = uk ∈ Uk (xk ) | f (xk , uk , wk ) ∈ Xk , for all wk ∈ Wk .

We assume that Ũk (xk ) is nonempty for all xk ∈ Xk and is somehow available. This is not automatically satisfied; similar to the deterministic case discussed earlier, the target tube {X0 , X1 , . . .} must be properly constructed using reachability methods, the sets Uk (xk ) must be sufficiently “rich” to ensure that this is possible, and the sets Ũk (xk ) must be computed.

We will now describe a rollout/MPC method that generalizes the one given earlier for deterministic problems. It satisfies the state and control constraints, and uses assumed certainty equivalence to define the base policy over ℓ − 1 steps, where ℓ > 1 is some integer. In particular, at a given state xk ∈ Xk , this method first fixes the disturbances wk+1 , . . . , wk+ℓ−1 to some typical values. It then applies the control ũk that minimizes over uk ∈ Ũk (xk )

the Q-factor

n

Q̃k (xk , uk ) = E g(xk , uk , wk ) + Hk+1 f (xk , uk , wk )

o

,

(2.43)

where Hk+1 (xk+1 ) is the optimal cost of the deterministic transfer from xk+1 to 0 in ℓ − 1 steps with controls ũm from the sets Ũm (xm ), m = k + 1, . . . , k + ℓ − 1, and with the disturbances fixed at their typical values. Here we require a constrained controllability condition that guarantees that this transfer is possible.

Note that the minimization over uk ∈ Ũk (xk ) of the Q-factor (2.43)

can be implemented by optimizing over sequences {uk , uk+1 , . . . , uk+ℓ−1 } an ℓ-stage deterministic optimal control problem. This is the problem that seamlessly concatenates the first stage minimization over uk [cf. Eq. (2.43)] with the (ℓ − 1)-stage minimization of the base heuristic. Consistent with the general rollout approach of this section, it may be possible to address this problem with gradient-based optimization methods.

A drawback of the MPC method of the preceding example is that it may not be well suited for on-line implementation because of the substantial amount of computation required at each state xk . An alternative is to introduce approximation in policy space on top of approximation in value space; cf. Section 2.1.5. To this end, we can generate a large number of sample states xsk , s = 1, . . . , q, and calculate the corresponding controls usk using the Q-factor minimization n

o usk ∈ arg min E g(xsk , uk , wk ) + Hk+1 f (xsk , uk , wk ) ,
